Improved Short Tags For Templating
==================================

:PHP-RFC: 0017
:Title: Improved Short Tags For Templating
:Author: Stas Malyshev <stas@php.net>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2008-04-03
:PHP-Version: 5.4
:Version: 1.0

Rationale
~~~~~~~~~

Many template systems use PHP as its underlying language, so that the
templates could be parsed and run by the efficient PHP engine, edited by
PHP tools, benefit from PHP performance solutions, etc. PHP template can
be written in two ways, with full tags:

::

   This is a home page for <i><?php echo $user; ?></i>. 
   Last visited at <?php echo $lastvisit; ?>. 

or short tags:

::

   This is a home page for <i><?= $user ?></i>. 
   Last visited at <?= $lastvisit ?>. 

The second form looks much nicer and cleaner, and can be easily
understood and edited by non-PHP people like graphical designers, copy
editors, etc. However, to use this form, the **short_open_tag** INI
setting should be enabled. When this tag is enabled, **<?** also is
treated as PHP starting tag, which may be a problem for people using XML
in templates, since the engine would confuse XML starting tag with PHP
code start.

Proposals
~~~~~~~~~

To try and enable people to write short and nice templates, while
keeping all XML folks happy, the following solutions were proposed:

Runtime short tags
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Make short_open_tags settable in runtime, thus allowing the template
engine to turn it on when parsing template, while leaving the
opportunity for the user to keep it off outside template parsing.

-  **Pro**: Allows the setting to be controlled locally without the user
   needing to do any administration or configuration
-  **Contra**: If the setting "leaks" (such as by template having an
   exception which is not properly caught by the engine, etc.) it may
   influence other application parts and break them.

Always available template tags
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Make the tag **<?=** work even when short_open_tag is off, thus allowing
nice templates without breaking the XML templates.

-  **Pro**: Allows the nice templates to always work, while keeping XML
   templates working with short_open_tag being off.
-  **Contra**: Templates with this tag wouldn't be validated as XML,
   some tools may be confused by this syntax.

Make other syntax
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Make some other short XML-compliant syntax (such as **<?:**) to be used
in templates.

-  **Pro**: Allows both XML checkers and template writers to be happy
-  **Contra**: Unusual syntax not supported by 100% of tools and not
   familiar to 100% of users

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Stas Malyshev stas@php.net
:Original Status: Implemented in PHP 5.4 (Always available ``<?=``)
:Slug: shortags
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/shortags
