Static Classes For PHP
======================

:PHP-RFC: 0023
:Title: Static Classes For PHP
:Author: Lars Strojny <lstrojny@php.net>
:Status: Withdrawn
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2008-05-03
:Version: 0.1

Introduction
------------

Static classes are a well known construct for utility classes or
stateless abstraction. C# for example has an class System.Environment to
access command line options, the current directory, the name of the
machine where the program is running and so on. In PHP the current
practice is to use an abstract class with static methods. Static classes
can act as utility containers. For such utility containers or for more
complex static inheritance, static classes are a helpful tool. This is
why they are proposed for PHP.

Syntax
------

.. code:: php

   <?php
   static class StaticClass
   {
       public static function staticMethod()
       {
           return 'foo';
       }
   }

   abstract static class AbstractStaticClass
   {
       abstract public static abstractStaticMethod();
   }

   abstract static class AbstractStaticClass2
   {
       public static function staticMethod()
       {
            return 'bar';
       }
   }


   StaticClass::staticMethod(); // (string)'foo'
   AbstractStaticClass2::staticMethod(); // Throws error, not allowed. Must be extended first

Class model rules
-----------------

The following rules would apply for static classes:

-  Declared static classes **may not** have non-static members
-  Static methods in abstract static classes **may not** be called. They
   must be extended first
-  In static classes, abstract static methods **are allowed** again
-  Static classes **may not** have a constructor, destructor, dynamic
   interceptors or ``__toString()``
-  Static classes **may not** extend non-static classes
-  The current behaviour of abstract classes/non-static classes with
   static members **would not** change. This is important for backwards
   compatibility
-  ``__setStatic()`` and ``__getStatic()`` **will** provide
   functionality similiar to ``__get()`` and ``__set()``
-  Static classes **cannot** be instantiated
-  Static classes **can** implement interfaces containing only static
   methods

Code
----

-  A few features missing, but initial functionality works:
   `static-classes-002.diff <http://lars.schokokeks.org/php/static-classes-002.diff>`__

Further reading
---------------

-  `Static classes in
   C# <http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/79b3xss3(VS.80).aspx>`__

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Lars Strojny lstrojny@php.net
:Original Status: in the works
:Slug: static-classes
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/static-classes
