Short Syntax For Arrays
=======================

:PHP-RFC: 0025
:Title: Short Syntax For Arrays
:Author: Ryusuke Sekiyama <rsky0711 at gmail . com>, Sebastian Deutsch <sebastian.deutsch at 9elements . com>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2008-05-27
:PHP-Version: 5.4
:Version: 0.9

**2008 Votes**

-  Votes (+9/-14):

   -  Pro: Andrei Zmievski, Andi Gutmans, Pierre Joye, Rasmus Lerdorf,
      Stanislav Malyshev, Brian Moon, Kalle Sommer Nielsen, Edin
      Kadribasic, Philip Olson
   -  Contra: Antony Dovgal, Derick Rethans, Jani Taskinen, Lokrain,
      Felipe Pena, Marcus Boerger, David Soria Parra, Johannes Schlüter,
      Maciek Sokolewicz, Ilia Alshanetsky, Daniel Brown, Jochem Maas,
      Hannes Magnusson, David Coallier

-  Userland Votes (+17/-3):

   -  Pro: Sebastian Deutsch, Ryusuke Sekiyama, Stefan Marr, Alexey
      Zakhlestin, Carl P. Corliss, Darius Jahandarie, Giedrius D, Eric
      Coleman, Max Antonov, Mike Ford, Larry Garfield, Sam Barrow,
      Taylor Luk, Hans Ahlin, Karoly Negyesi, Guilherme Blanco,
      Jonathan-Bond Caron
   -  Contra: Geoffrey Sneddon, Tomi Kaistila, David Zühlke

-  **Note: This list was created by guessing (cvs name vs. real name)
   who has commit rights - please correct mistakes**

This RFC will discuss an language enhancement for simple and easy array
definition.

Update: May 2011
----------------

This topic has come up again on the list.

Introduction
------------

In some cases it is necessary that you have to pass function parameters
as an array. Especially when you work with nested arrays the php array
function tends to make the code looking ugly. If you take a look at
other languages (Ruby, Python, Javascript) there is a short syntax for
arrays using square brackets. Maybe PHP should adopt this behaviour to
make code more readable and maintainable.

Another solution would be to implement `named
parameters <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Keyword_argument>`__.

Syntax
------

Ryusuke suggested two possibly syntaxes and also provides two patches
for a solution:

**Square bracket array shortcut - keys and values are separated by
colons:**

.. code:: php

       $a = [1, 2, 3];
       $b = ['foo': 'orange', 'bar': 'apple', 'baz': 'lemon'];

**Square bracket array shortcut - keys and values are separated by
double arrows:**

.. code:: php

       $a = [1, 2, 3];
       $b = ['foo' => 'orange', 'bar' => 'apple', 'baz' => 'lemon'];

Proposal and Patch
------------------

| The first solution is more compact:
  http://www.opendogs.org/pub/php-5.3dev-080109-sbar.patch
| The second solution is more "The PHP Way":
  http://www.opendogs.org/pub/php-5.3dev-080109-sbar2.patch

Pro / Contra
------------

Pro and contra arguments that were derived from the list.

Pro
~~~

-  Good for framework development when dealing with long parameterlists
-  Other web languages have similar syntax
-  Readable

Contra
~~~~~~

-  Yet another alias
-  Would take distinctness from []
-  Not searchable through search engines
-  Unreadable
-  Patch may be difficult to maintain in future

Conclusion
----------

This patch has been merged in PHP 5.4.0 and trunk.

Discussion on the List
----------------------

#. 2003-11-04 : `Proposal: Array
   syntax <http://markmail.org/message/rfolc6gxjmit6nes>`__
#. 2007-02-03 : `Syntactic improvement to
   array <http://markmail.org/message/67nff7mn4kqdbtfm>`__
#. 2008-01-08 : `[RFC] Square brackets
   shortcut <http://markmail.org/message/54sadarpmjdhsm3f>`__
#. 2008-01-11 : `SUMMARY: Array
   syntax <http://markmail.org/message/c4jwv7dl2uufxuxh>`__
#. 2008-05-21 : `Short syntax for array
   literals <http://markmail.org/message/rsi4welftwou24p3>`__
#. 2011-05-09 : `5.4
   again <http://markmail.org/message/fx3brcm4ekh645se>`__

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:First Published At: Jan 10, 2008
:Last Update: May 9, 2011
:Original Authors: Ryusuke Sekiyama <rsky0711 at gmail . com>, Sebastian Deutsch <sebastian.deutsch at 9elements . com>
:Original Status: Implemented in 5.4
:Slug: shortsyntaxforarrays
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/shortsyntaxforarrays
