Class Casting To Scalar
=======================

:PHP-RFC: 0050
:Title: Class Casting To Scalar
:Author: Mark Karpeles <mark.at.hell.ne.jp>
:Status: Withdrawn
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2008-11-24
:Version: 1.0

This RFC covers a way to cast classes to scalar values other than
strings.

Introduction
------------

Currently the Zend Engine provides some magic to methods in classes with
defined names, for example \__toString() is called when someone attempts
to cast a class to a string.

The purpose of this RFC is to propose a way to allow casting to other
scalar types (boolean, double, integer).

Why casting?
~~~~~~~~~~~~

For the same reasons as \__toString() exists, casting to other types
might be needed. Feature requests have been submitted regarding this in
the past.

Possible features/implementations
---------------------------------

Interface or magic method?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Currently two possibilities exists:

-  Implementing a new magic method, for example \__scalarValue() or
   \__cast() in the Zend Engine.
-  Creating a new interface (for example ScalarAccess?) and force the
   presence of one function (scalarValue()?) which will return the
   scalar value for this class.

Pass requested type?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Concern has been raised over the fact of passing the requested value
type as parameter to the function, as it could be used to disallow some
kinds of cast.

Proposal and Patch
------------------

-  Patch for \__cast() against PHP 5.2.6:
   http://ookoo.org/svn/snip/php-5.2.6_class_cast_func.patch
-  Patch for \__cast() against PHP 5.3.0:
   http://ookoo.org/svn/snip/php-5.3.0alpha2_class_cast_func.patch
-  Extension for ScalarAccess interface for PHP 5.2.6:
   http://ookoo.org/svn/snip/phpcastable/

Rejected Features
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  None yet

Bugs
~~~~

-  When used with math operators, it seems we \*have\* to cast to
   integer if not explictly requested in the code. TODO: find a way to
   force our way with a float value if needed

Changelog
---------

2008-11-24: Initial draft

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Mark Karpeles <mark.at.hell.ne.jp>
:Original Status: Under Discussion
:Slug: class_casting_to_scalar
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/class_casting_to_scalar
