Short Syntax For Functions
==========================

:PHP-RFC: 0108
:Title: Short Syntax For Functions
:Author: Antony Dovgal <tony@daylessday.org>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2011-06-01
:Version: 1.0

This RFC is a parody on `shortsyntaxforarrays
RFC <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/shortsyntaxforarrays>`__.

Introduction
------------

In some cases it is necessary that you have to declare a lot of
functions. Especially when you work with classes and their methods, the
function declaration tends to make the code looking ugly. If you take a
look at other languages (Brainfuck, Brainfork, Feckfeck, Smallfuck, Ook!
and Spoon), they don't have such syntax at all! It's all short and
readable and easy to type! Maybe PHP should adopt this behaviour to make
code more readable and maintainable. The purpose of RFCs are to work
collaboratively towards a specification and finally an implementation of
an idea.

Syntax
------

We might just replace the current **function <name>(<parameters>)
{<body>}** syntax with something shorter and better. I'd personally
propose to use dashes and dots for everything of the above. It's short
and you can read it really fast.

Example code:

.. code:: php

   function some_long_function_name($array_parameter_omg, $some_more)
   {
    --here_be_dragons--
   }

New short non-ugly easily readable example code:

.. code:: php

   . .[., .].
   .
    --...._.._......--
   .

Proposal and Patch
------------------

No patch is available yet. I'm working on it, though.

Changelog
---------

#. 2011-06-01 : Changed the RFC to include dashes.
#. 2011-06-01 : Initial revision.

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Extra: , Other formats ..
:Original Authors: Antony Dovgal tony@daylessday.org
:Original Status: Under Discussion
:Slug: shortsyntaxforfunctions
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/shortsyntaxforfunctions
