Apparmor Change_hat Functionality For Php-fpm
=============================================

:PHP-RFC: 0215
:Title: Apparmor Change_hat Functionality For Php-fpm
:Author: Gernot Vormayr <gvormayr@gmail.com>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2013-06-09
:PHP-Version: 5.6
:Version: 0.9

Introduction
------------

Apparmor is a mandatory access module for the linux kernel. It works by
enforcing policies on different applications. Apparmor also provides
functionality for applications to change to a different *hat*. With this
mechanism it is possible to change to a different set of policies in the
application.

Proposal
--------

Add functionality to php-fpm to support the additional parameter
**apparmor_hat** in the pool config. Upon spawning a new worker, the
worker tries to change to this specific hat. With this feature it is
easier for shared hosters to isolate and/or restrict different users.
This approach has the advantage over unix access rights, that the
apparmor policies allow for a more fine grained control.

-  It should not be possible to change back, since this might be
   possible from php code. The proposed patch prevents this.

   -  Because of this the apparmor_hat is per pool.

-  This needs libapparmor. The proposed patch (`Pull Request 373 on
   github <https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/373>`__) checks for
   libapparmor on compilation and omits the feature if it is not found.
-  If the feature is not compiled in, but expected, php-fpm does not
   start up, because it does not know the pool parameter.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

-  None

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

-  next PHP 5.x
-  should be easily backportable to all php versions which include fpm
   since it does not enforce any libraries and does nothing if not
   configured

SAPIs Impacted
--------------

-  Only fpm

Impact to Existing Extensions
-----------------------------

-  None

New Constants
-------------

Describe any new constants so they can be accurately and comprehensively
explained in the PHP documentation.

php.ini Defaults
----------------

-  There are no defaults. If 'change_hat' is ommited from the pool
   config, then the hat will not be changed.

Patches and Tests
-----------------

-  Full patch: `Pull Request 343 on
   github <https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/343>`__ `Pull Request 373
   on github <https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/373>`__

References
----------

This is inspired by the
`module <http://wiki.apparmor.net/index.php/Mod_apparmor_example>`__
which does the same thing for apache.

Rejected Features
-----------------

Vote
----

Voting started on 23.06.2013 and ends on 1.07.2013.

Question: RFC/fpm_change_hat
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes?
-  No?

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Gernot Vormayr, gvormayr@gmail.com
:Original Status: Implemented (PHP 5.6) https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/373
:Slug: fpm_change_hat
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/fpm_change_hat
