Build OpenSSL Module By Default
===============================

:PHP-RFC: 0261
:Title: Build OpenSSL Module By Default
:Author: Yasuo Ohgaki <yohgaki@ohgaki.net>
:Status: Withdrawn
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2014-02-03
:Version: 0.9

Introduction
------------

Security matters almost all applications. PHP needs ability to handle
cryptography by default.

Proposal
--------

Build OpenSSL module by default.

OpenSSL should be able to disable manually. Module authors must use #if
when it is not available.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

None.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

PHP 5.6 and up

Impact to Existing Extensions
-----------------------------

OpenSSL

php.ini Defaults
----------------

If there are any php.ini settings then list:

-  hardcoded default values
-  php.ini-development values
-  php.ini-production values

Open Issues
-----------

Make sure there are no open issues when the vote starts!

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

The voting period is 2014/02/XX until 2014/02/XX.

Question: Build OpenSSL module by default
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Thank you for voting.

Patches and Tests
-----------------

Not required as it is simple one liner of config.m4

Implementation
--------------

After the project is implemented, this section should contain

#. the version(s) it was merged to
#. a link to the git commit(s)
#. a link to the PHP manual entry for the feature

References
----------

Links to external references, discussions or RFCs

Rejected Features
-----------------

Keep this updated with features that were discussed on the mail lists.

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Yasuo Ohgaki yohgaki@ohgaki.net
:Original Status: Under Discussion
:Slug: build-openssl-by-default
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/build-openssl-by-default
