Unify Crypt Source INI Settings
===============================

:PHP-RFC: 0265
:Title: Unify Crypt Source INI Settings
:Author: Yasuo Ohgaki <yohgaki@ohgaki.net>
:Status: Withdrawn
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2014-02-24
:Version: 0.1

Introduction
------------

Crypt source such as /dev/urandom is mandatory for secure programs. None
the less, PHP does not have way to specify crypt source as a core. This
RFC proposes 2 new INIs for it.

Proposal
--------

Introduce 2 new INIs for all platforms.

Pseudo RNG - non-blocking. INI_PERDIR

::

   random.entropy_strong_source=       (/dev/(u|a)random etc. Default: depends on platform)

RNG - may block. INI_PERDIR

::

   random.entropy_crypto_source=        (/dev/random etc. Default: depends on platform)

Appropriate default for the platform is detected during build time.

session.entropy_file uses /dev/*random. It share the
random.entropy_strong_source if it is empty. (Like default_charset with
Default Char Encoding RFC)

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

None.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

PHP 5.6

Impact to Existing Extensions
-----------------------------

session/mcrypt, any extension uses /dev/*random. These module's code is
changed to use new INI settings where it is possible.

New Constants
-------------

None

php.ini Defaults
----------------

-  hardcoded default values

None, but appropriate values will bet set for the platform.

-  php.ini-development values
-  php.ini-production values

::

   ;random.entropy_strong_source="/dev/urandom" (INI_PERDIR) 
   ;random.entropy_crypto_source="/dev/random" (INI_PERDIR)

Note: INI lines are commented out.

Under Windows, different values may be set.

Open Issues
-----------

None

Unaffected PHP Functionality
----------------------------

Although this RFC affects some modules, it does not affects existing
feature. All function should remains as it is now.

Future Scope
------------

These 2 INIs may be used crypto related new and existing modules.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

Yes/No

Patches and Tests
-----------------

TBD

Implementation
--------------

After the project is implemented, this section should contain

#. the version(s) it was merged to
#. a link to the git commit(s)
#. a link to the PHP manual entry for the feature

References
----------

Links to external references, discussions or RFCs

Rejected Features
-----------------

Keep this updated with features that were discussed on the mail lists.

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:First Published At: http://wiki.php.net/rfc/unified-crypt-source
:Original Authors: Yasuo Ohgaki yohgaki@ohgaki.net
:Original Status: Under Discussion
:Slug: unified-crypto-source
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/unified-crypto-source
