Add Session_gc()
================

:PHP-RFC: 0267
:Title: Add Session_gc()
:Author: Yasuo Ohgaki <yohgaki@ohgaki.net>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2014-03-13
:PHP-Version: 7.1
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

Current session GC depends on probability. Thus, low traffic sites would
not delete expired session data and could be usable as valid session.
Traffic varies day and night time for high traffic sites. Chances are
high that expired session may not be deleted as it should.

The best way to purge old session data is executing GC periodically.

Although timestamp based session management is declined twice, it is
mandatory for session management. Please refer to Strict Session RFC for
details.

-  https://wiki.php.net/rfc/precise_session_management

Proposal
--------

-  Add session_gc() API.
-  Document calling session_gc() periodically is the best practice.

::

   int session_gc(void)

It simply executes GC save handler defined.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

None

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

PHP 7.2

Vote
----

This project requires a 2/3 majority. Vote starts: 2016/08/10 - Vote
ends: 2016/08/17 23:59:59 UTC

Question: Add session_gc() function
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Patches and Tests
-----------------

-  https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/1852

Implementation
--------------

After the project is implemented, this section should contain

#. the version(s) it was merged to

   #. PHP 7.1 and master branch (Merged to PHP 7.1 also by RM
      permission)

#. a link to the git commit(s)

   #. http://git.php.net/?p=php-src.git;a=commitdiff;h=1cf179e4150308d8217d9517408ca5e22b5d607f

#. a link to the PHP manual entry for the feature

   #. http://svn.php.net/viewvc?view=revision&revision=339955

References
----------

-  https://bugs.php.net/bug.php?id=11100

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Create Date: 2014-03-13
:Modify Date: 2016-08-10
:Original Authors: Yasuo Ohgaki, yohgaki@ohgaki.net
:Original Status: Voting
:Slug: session-gc
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/session-gc
