Normalize String Bitwise Shifts
===============================

:PHP-RFC: 0274
:Title: Normalize String Bitwise Shifts
:Author: Chris Wright <daverandom@php.net>
:Status: Withdrawn
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2014-04-15
:Version: 0.1

Introduction
------------

This RFC proposes that the behaviour of bitwise shift operations on
strings be altered to match the behaviour of bitwise shifts on integers.

Proposal
--------

Currently, bitwise shift operations on strings are performed by
converting the string to an integer and returning an integer. This
behaviour does not match that of the other bitwise operators when they
are used with string operands, as these perform the operation on a
byte-by-byte basis, and return a string.

This RFC proposes that the behaviour of the bitwise shift operators be
altered, such that when the left operand is a string the shift operation
is performed on the byte values of the string's characters, carrying
bits between bytes as necessary. The will effectively treat the string
as an arbitrarily large integer.

TODO: Add some example use cases

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

Existing code that relies on the current behaviour will no longer
produce the originally expected result. This can be easily resolved by
explicitly casting the left operand to an integer.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

As this is a backwards-incompatible change, this RFC targets PHP 6.

Open Issues
-----------

Should right shifts shift copies of the left-most bits on, or always
shift cleared bits?

Unaffected PHP Functionality
----------------------------

Only bitwise shifts in user land where the left operand is a string are
affected.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

Yes or no.

Patches and Tests
-----------------

A WIP patch can be seen `on
Github <https://github.com/DaveRandom/php-src/compare/string_bitwise_shifts>`__.

References
----------

`Original internals thread <http://news.php.net/php.internals/73681>`__

Rejected Features
-----------------

None so far.

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Chris Wright, daverandom@php.net
:Original Status: Inactive
:Slug: string-bitwise-shifts
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/string-bitwise-shifts
