Loosening Heredoc/nowdoc Scanner
================================

:PHP-RFC: 0305
:Title: Loosening Heredoc/nowdoc Scanner
:Author: Tjerk Meesters <datibbaw@php.net>
:Status: Withdrawn
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2014-08-29
:Version: 0.9

Introduction
------------

Currently the rules for ending a heredoc or nowdoc are quite
restrictive, requiring a newline after the closing identifier; this
makes it more awkward to combine multiple quotations, such as in array
declarations or with other operators. The `manual
entry <http://php.net/manual/en/language.types.string.php#language.types.string.syntax.heredoc>`__
for heredocs has a big pink box to explain those intricate details.

For instance, this is how you would declare an array comprising a
heredoc and regular string:

.. code:: php

   $strings = [<<<EOS
   hello
   EOS
   , ' world'];

The comma that you would normally put on the same line as the previous
element must now be put on the next line.

Currently, this restriction also causes a parse error with code such as
this:

.. code:: php

   return <<<EOS
   Foo!
   EOS; // <-- file ends here

Proposal
--------

This proposal aims to lift the current newline restriction and make it
less awkward to use heredocs and nowdocs within constructs, such as
array declarations:

.. code:: php

   $strings = [<<<EOS
   a
   EOS, <<<EOS
   b
   EOS];

Or with other operators (e.g. concatenation):

.. code:: php

   class Test
   {
       const A = <<<EOS
   ab
   EOS . <<<EOS
   cd
   EOS;
   }

The proposal suggests two distinct ways in which this can be achieved:

Loosened restrictions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Ends a quotation when the closing identifier is followed by something
that can't be part of an identifier.

Removed restrictions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Ends a quotation as soon as the closing identifier is encountered.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

Depending on whether we choose to loosen the restrictions (defined
above) or completely remove it, the following behaviour will be changed:

.. _loosened-restrictions-1:

Loosened restrictions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following test code (taken from the aptly called "torture the
T_END_HEREDOC rules") will not work as expected:

.. code:: php

   print <<<ENDOFHEREDOC
   ENDOFHEREDOC    ;
       ENDOFHEREDOC;
   ENDOFHEREDOC   
       ENDOFHEREDOC
   $ENDOFHEREDOC;

   ENDOFHEREDOC;

It emits "ENDOFHEREDOC ;\nENDOFHEREDOC;" and then stop scanning, leading
to a parse error on the next line.

This is a rather extreme example of trying to break the scanner; while
not entirely impossible, it's most likely not based on anything one
would encounter in the wild.

.. _removed-restrictions-1:

Removed restrictions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Removing the restrictions altogether will cause issues in code such as
this:

.. code:: php

   $s = <<<EOS
   Foo bar
   EOSBLA
   EOS;

It emits "Foo bar" and then stops scanning, leading to a parse error at
"BLA".

Although this may seem undesirable behaviour, it should be noted that
the developer is in complete control of choosing the name for their
enclosures; it's important to choose an enclosure that doesn't occur
naturally inside the quotation.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

PHP 7

Unaffected PHP Functionality
----------------------------

It doesn't impact the rules that govern the contents inside the heredoc
or nowdoc.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

Should the heredoc and nowdoc scanner be changed?

Voting choices will be:

#. No, leave the scanner as it is.
#. Yes, loosen the newline restriction with characters that can't be
   part of an identifier.
#. Yes, remove the newline restriction altogether.

This proposal requires a 2/3 majority as it affects the language.

**Note:** Both "Yes" options count towards changing the current
behaviour; if a single majority for the last option can't be reached,
the "loosened restrictions" will be applied.

Patches and Tests
-----------------

The RFC author will provide the patches.

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Tjerk Meesters, datibbaw@php.net
:Original Status: Obsolete
:Slug: heredoc-scanner-loosening
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/heredoc-scanner-loosening
