Remove Alternative PHP Tags
===========================

:PHP-RFC: 0307
:Title: Remove Alternative PHP Tags
:Author: Nikita Popov <nikic@php.net>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2014-09-09
:PHP-Version: 7.0
:Version: 1.0

Proposal
--------

This RFC proposes the removal of ASP tags (``<%``) and script tags
(``<script language=php>``) as a means of entering or leaving PHP mode.

The following syntactical elements are removed:

-  ``<%`` opening tag
-  ``<%=`` opening tag with echo
-  ``%>`` closing tag
-  ``(<script\s+language\s*=\s*(php|"php"|'php')\s*>)i`` opening tag
-  ``(</script>)i`` closing tag

The listed opening tags will no longer enter PHP mode and the listed
closing tags will no longer leave PHP mode.

Additionally the ``asp_tags`` ini directive is removed. Trying to enable
``asp_tags`` will result in a core error.

This RFC does **not** remove short opening tags (``<?``) or short
opening tags with echo (``<?=``).

Reasoning
---------

-  The alternative PHP tags have never gained any significant degree of
   usage. Their usage has been discouraged since forever.
-  The ASP tags depend on an ini directive and as such are non-portable.
   We generally try to move away from ini-dependent language behavior.
   With ASP tags removed, short open tags should be the last.
-  ASP tags `clash with underscore.js
   templates <http://stackoverflow.com/questions/14694116/how-to-disable-asp-style-php-tags-within-a-specific-file>`__
   and it's not possible to disable asp tags using ``ini_set()``.
-  Supporting different tags allows very weird mixing like
   ``<script language=php> echo "foo" %>``

Porting tool
------------

To simplify porting of legacy code using the alternative tags, a
`porting script <https://gist.github.com/nikic/74769d74dad8b9ef221b>`__
is provided. The script takes a directory and will replace ASP and
script tags in all ``.php`` files contained in this directory:

::

   php -d asp_tags=1 portAlternativeTags.php dir/

Vote
----

The vote started on 2014-09-24 and ended on 2014-10-01. The required 2/3
majority has been reached, as such this RFC is accepted.

Question: Remove alternative PHP tags in PHP 7?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Nikita Popov nikic@php.net
:Original Status: Accepted
:Patch: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/813
:Slug: remove_alternative_php_tags
:Targeting: PHP 7
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/remove_alternative_php_tags
