Fix List() Behavior Inconsistency
=================================

:PHP-RFC: 0308
:Title: Fix List() Behavior Inconsistency
:Author: Dmitry Stogov <dmitry@zend.com>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2014-09-11
:PHP-Version: 7.0
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

According to `PHP
documentation <http://php.net/manual/en/function.list.php>`__ list()
construct doesn't work with strings. However in some cases it works.

::

   $ php -r 'list($a,$b) = "aa";var_dump($a,$b);'
   NULL
   NULL
   $ php -r '$a[0]="ab"; list($a,$b) = $a[0]; var_dump($a,$b);'
   string(1) "a"
   string(1) "b"

This behavior caused by implementation feature and wasn't made on
purpose.

Proposal
--------

Make list() behave with strings in consistent way. There are two
options:

Disable string handling in all cases
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This will disable undocumented feature and it may break some existing
PHP code.

Enable string handling in all cases
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This will make the following code work.

::

   list($a,$b) = "str";

Instead of assignment NULL into $a and $b, it'll assign 's' and 't'
characters. However, it also may break some existing PHP code.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

Both options may affect existing PHP code.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

PHP7

Vote
----

This project requires a 2/3 majority, between first and second or third
options.

Voting started on 2014-09-25 and ends 2014-10-02.

Question: Fix list() behavior inconsistency?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  don't fix
-  disable string handling in all cases
-  enable string handling in all cases

Implementation
--------------

Support for strings has been removed for all cases. Support for
``ArrayAccess`` has been added for all cases (previously it was not
supported for temporary variables).

https://github.com/php/php-src/commit/7c7b9184b1fdf7add1715079f22241bc1185fcb0

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Dmitry Stogov, dmitry@zend.com
:Original Status: Implemented (in PHP 7)
:Slug: fix_list_behavior_inconsistency
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/fix_list_behavior_inconsistency
