Remove PHP 4 Constructors
=========================

:PHP-RFC: 0330
:Title: Remove PHP 4 Constructors
:Author: Levi Morrison <levim@php.net>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2014-11-17
:PHP-Version: 7.0
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

PHP 4 constructors are methods that have the same name as the class they
are defined in. PHP 5 preserved the ability to use PHP 4 style
constructors in some cases; the strangeness of when the constructor is
and isn't used increases the mental model for programmers.

.. code:: php

   class Filter {

       // A constructor in PHP 4 and 5
       function filter($a) {}
   }

.. code:: php

   // Namespaced classes do not recognize PHP 4 constructors
   namespace NS;
   class Filter {

       // Not a constructor
       function filter($a) {}
   }

.. code:: php

   // Defining __construct and filter makes filter a normal method
   class Filter {
       function __construct() {}

       // Not a constructor
       function filter($a) {}
   }

   //But defining filter first raises an E_STRICT
   class Filter {

       // Not a constructor…
       function filter($a) {}

       // This raises E_STRICT
       function __construct() {}
   }

Proposal
--------

PHP 7 will emit ``E_DEPRECATED`` whenever a PHP 4 constructor is
defined. When the method name matches the class name, the class is not
in a namespace, and a PHP 5 constructor (``__construct``) is not present
then an ``E_DEPRECATED`` will be emitted. PHP 8 will stop emitting
``E_DEPRECATED`` and the methods will not be recognized as constructors.

PHP 7 will also stop emitting ``E_STRICT`` when a method with the same
name as the class is present as well as ``__construct``.

Refer to the `Examples <#examples>`__ section to see how code is
impacted.

Backward Incompatible Changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Since an ``E_DEPRECATED`` will be emitted in PHP 7 there may be some
backwards compatibility breaks when people use custom error handlers.

In PHP 8 recognition for old constructors will be outright removed,
meaning that anything without a ``__construct`` will not work the same
way it used to. The old-style constructor will be considered a normal
method and will not be called when the object is constructed. The fix is
to rename the constructor to ``__construct``.

Examples
~~~~~~~~

.. code:: php

   class Filter {

       // PHP 5: filter is a constructor
       // PHP 7: filter is a constructor and E_DEPRECATED is raised
       // PHP 8: filter is a normal method and is not a constructor; no E_DEPRECATED is raised
       function filter($a) {}
   }

   $filter = new ReflectionMethod('Filter', 'filter');

   // PHP 5: bool(true)
   // PHP 7: bool(true)
   // PHP 8: bool(false)
   var_dump($filter->isConstructor());

.. code:: php

   // function filter is not used as constructor in PHP 5+
   class Filter {
       // PHP 5: E_STRICT "Redefining already defined constructor"
       // PHP 7: No error is raised
       // PHP 8: No error is raised
       function filter($a) {}
       function __construct() {}
   }

.. code:: php

   // function filter is not used as constructor in PHP 5+
   class Filter {
       function __construct() {}

       // PHP 5.0.0 - 5.2.13, 5.3.0 - 5.3.2: E_STRICT "Redefining already defined constructor"
       // PHP 5.2.14 - 5.2.17, 5.3.3 - 5.6: No error is raised
       // PHP 7: No error is raised
       // PHP 8: No error is raised
       function filter($a) {}
   }

.. code:: php

   class Filter {
       // PHP 5: filter is a constructor
       // PHP 7: filter is a constructor and E_DEPRECATED is raised
       // PHP 8: filter is a normal method and is not a constructor; no E_DEPRECATED is raised
       function filter() {}
   }
    
   class FilterX extends Filter {

       function __construct() {
           // PHP 5: Filter::filter is called; no error
           // PHP 7: Filter::filter is called; no error
           // PHP 8: "Fatal error: Cannot call constructor"
           parent::__construct();
       }

   }

   new FilterX();

Voting
------

This RFC targets PHP 7 and PHP 8. Please read the RFC to understand what
is being proposed.

This RFC requires 2/3 vote in favor of deprecating and removing PHP 4
style constructors to pass.

Do you vote to remove PHP 4 constructors as outlined in this RFC?

Question: remove_php4_constructors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Voting will close on the evening (UTC-7) of March 6th.

Patches and Tests
-----------------

An implementation based on the master branch can be found here:
https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/1061

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Contributors: , Andrea Faulds, ajf@ajf.me
:Original Authors: Levi Morrison levim@php.net
:Original Status: Deprecation Implemented (in PHP 7.0)
:Slug: remove_php4_constructors
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/remove_php4_constructors
