PHP 7.0 Timeline
================

:PHP-RFC: 0333
:Title: PHP 7.0 Timeline
:Author: Zeev Suraski <zeev@php.net>
:Status: Active
:Type: Process
:Created: 2014-11-21
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

With key decisions about both the version number and the engine for PHP
7 behind us, it's time to define an agreed-upon timeline so that all
contributors can align around it. The purpose of this RFC is to define a
one year timeline for the delivery of PHP 7.0, with a projected release
date of November 2015.

Proposal
--------

As the competitive landscape for PHP is evolving, the proposal is to
shorten that timeline as much as possible while still taking advantage
of the unique opportunities available to us due to the major version
number change. A one year timeline will allow us a fair amount of time
to work on changes that are only allowed in major versions - namely,
ones that break compatibility. Arguably, while we should definitely take
the opportunity to implement compatibility-breaking changes in 7.0, we
also shouldn't turn it into a compatibility-breaking festival, as the
more we break, the more likely it is users would delay upgrades, stay
with old, insecure versions - or even consider other alternative
options. RFCs that don't explicitly require a major version change
(i.e., ones that don't break compatibility) - can also be proposed, but
they should be secondary, as they can equally make it into future minor
versions (7.1, 7.2, etc.).

+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Proposed Milestones  |                      |                      |
+======================+======================+======================+
| Milestone            | Timeline             | Comment              |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| 1. **Line up any     | Now - Mar 15 (4+     | We're already well   |
| remaining RFCs that  | additional months)   | under way with doing |
| target PHP 7.0.**    |                      | that, with the       |
|                      |                      | PHPNG, AST, uniform  |
|                      |                      | variable syntax,     |
|                      |                      | etc.                 |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| 2. **Finalize        | Mar 16 - Jun 15 (3   |                      |
| implementation &     | months)              |                      |
| testing of new       |                      |                      |
| features.**          |                      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| 3. **Release         | Jun 16 - Oct 15 (3   | Subject to quality!  |
| Candidate (RC)       | months)              |                      |
| cycles**             |                      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| 4. **GA/Release**    | Mid October 2015     | Subject to quality!  |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

It's worth noting that the 3rd and 4th milestones will be quality
dependent. If we have evidence that suggests that PHP 7 isn't
sufficiently mature to go into the RC stage in June, or GA in October -
we should of course adjust the timeline accordingly, and not push out a
half-baked release. However, the goal would be to stick as much as
possible to the deadline of new going-into-7.0 RFCs, and strive to
follow the timelines for the 2nd and 3rd milestones as much as possible,
to ensure an October 2015 release of PHP 7.0.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

Proposed voting choices are Yes (vote in favor of the timeline) or No
(reject the timeline)

As this is not a language-changing RFC, a simple majority of 50%+1 is
required to approve this RFC.

Vote
----

Question: php7timeline
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Zeev Suraski, zeev@php.net
:Original Status: Accepted
:Slug: php7timeline
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/php7timeline
