Add PHP Files To Auto_prepend From Extensions
=============================================

:PHP-RFC: 0345
:Title: Add PHP Files To Auto_prepend From Extensions
:Author: Benjamin Eberlei <kontakt@beberlei.de>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2015-01-04
:Version: 0.1.1

Introduction
------------

It should be possible to ship PHP Extensions that contain both C and PHP
code to achieve their goal. While C code is obviously much faster, for
many extensions it is viable to build glue code, useful wrappers and
performance uncritical code using PHP.

Proposal
--------

The auto_prepend mechanism is improved to contain a list of files to
pass to zend_execute_scripts instead of just using the INI value for
auto_prepend.

If a php.ini value for auto_prepend is configured it will be loaded
**after** all the PHP files registered by extensions.

This functionality can be achieved already using RINIT to emulate this
sort of behavior. The following three extensions use this sort of
behavior:

-  Couchbase
-  Qafoo Profiler
-  Z-Ray (Verified as per they docs only)

Others have expressed their wish to use this feature.

Using RINIT is error prone and a little bit dangerous, because is a bit
too early for some data to be cleanly created (globals).

Adding this kind of API in a straightforward way would allow extension
authors to make use of PHP for parts of their project. This simplifies
installation for users.

The exact changes are up for discussion, this is how I propose it might
work:

#. Introduce a global list of files to include from extensions.
#. Change php_execute_scripts (main/main.c) + zend_execute_scripts to
   access global list for including files.
#. Add API that extensions can use during MINIT to add files to the
   global list.

The API of zend_execute_scripts needs to change for this:

::

   -ZEND_API int zend_execute_scripts(int type, zval *retval, int file_count, ...);
   +ZEND_API int zend_execute_scripts(int type, zval *retval, zend_file_handle **files);

We can introduce a new function zend_execute_script that can be used by
code that called zend_execute_scripts before:

::

   ZEND_API int zend_execute_script(int type, zval *retval, zend_file_handle *file);

Then php_execute_scripts can build the list of files from extension
prepends, ini prepend, primary file and append files.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

Nothing

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

PHP7

RFC Impact
----------

To SAPIs
~~~~~~~~

SAPIs must not be updated \*unless\* they use zend_execute_scripts
directly.

To Existing Extensions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

No

To Opcache
~~~~~~~~~~

Not verified, but given the locality of the change in
php_execute_scripts and reusing of an exisitig feature, it does not seem
likely to break.

Open Issues
-----------

Unaffected PHP Functionality
----------------------------

-  SAPIs are unaffected by this change unless they use
   zend_execute_scripts directly.
-  Opcache is unaffected by this change.
-  Extensions are unaffected by this change.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

This will be a yes/no vote with 50%+1 majority, because it is not a
public API to change only introducing a new one in the Engine Core.

Patches and Tests
-----------------

Working on a prototype.

Updates
-------

v0.1.1: Fix typo in code example.

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Benjamin Eberlei kontakt@beberlei.de
:Original Status: Discussion
:Slug: extension_prepend_files
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/extension_prepend_files
