Make Empty() A Variadic
=======================

:PHP-RFC: 0373
:Title: Make Empty() A Variadic
:Author: Thomas Punt <tpunt@hotmail.co.uk>
:Status: Declined
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2015-02-20
:Version: 0.1

Introduction
------------

This RFC aims make ``empty()`` have a variable arity.

.. code:: php

   // example current usage #1:
   if (empty($a) || empty($b) || empty($c)) {}

   // example current usage #2:
   if (!empty($a) && !empty($b) && !empty($c)) {}

   // new proposed usage #1:
   if (empty($a, $b, $c)) {}

   // new proposed usage #2:
   if (!empty($a, $b, $c)) {}

Proposal
--------

The proposal is to change ``empty()`` so that it can accept multiple
arguments. This will enable developers to write more compact code when
checking for the emptiness of multiple expressions.

As the above snippet demonstrates, the semantics of a variadic
``empty()`` should be the equivalent to logically OR'ing together
multiple ``empty()`` invocations. Thus, if *any* arguments passed into
``empty()`` are considered falsy, then **true** will be returned; if
*no* arguments are considered empty, then **false** is returned. This
behaviour is the most logical (given ``empty()``'s falsy semantics) and
seems to be the most prevalent usage of multiple empty checks in
user-land code (therefore being the most beneficial behaviour).

Justification
-------------

In PHP, it is not uncommon to see conditionals consisting of multiple
``empty()`` invocations. This is evident by simply browsing through some
popular open source projects:

WordPress ((
https://github.com/WordPress/WordPress/blob/master/wp-admin/includes/template.php#L2007
)):

.. code:: php

   if ( empty( $pointer_id ) || empty( $selector ) || empty( $args ) || empty( $args['content'] ) )

OpenCart ((
https://github.com/opencart/opencart/blob/45fc863fa068d82b5280890e6466a198faa54bff/upload/admin/controller/openbay/ebay_profile.php#L128
)):

.. code:: php

   if (empty($setting['dispatch_times']) || empty($setting['countries']) || empty($setting['returns'])){

phpBB ((
https://github.com/phpbb/phpbb/blob/040d451dcca9ae54d8f4b7bdd2f231033765a8f2/phpBB/phpbb/notification/method/jabber.php#L48
)):

.. code:: php

   return !(
       empty($this->config['jab_enable']) ||
       empty($this->config['jab_host']) ||
       empty($this->config['jab_username']) ||
       empty($this->config['jab_password']) ||
       !@extension_loaded('xml')
   );

And so on...

So this seems like quite a common need for users, and one that cannot be
emulated in user-land code because of ``empty()``'s behaviour of
suppressing undefined variable errors.

This change will also make ``empty()`` more inline with the
not-too-dissimilar ``isset()``, which is good for
`POLA <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Principle_of_least_astonishment>`__.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

No BC breakages.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

PHP 7.0

Unaffected PHP Functionality
----------------------------

The current functionality of ``empty()`` will be completely preserved.

Vote
----

Because this is a language change, a 2/3 majority is required. It is a
simple yes/no vote on whether ``empty()`` should be made a variadic.

Question: Make empty() a Variadic
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Voting starts on 2015-03-07 and ends on 2015-03-21.

Patches and Tests
-----------------

PR: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/1109

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Thomas Punt, tpunt@hotmail.co.uk
:Slug: variadic_empty
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/variadic_empty
