Proposals For PHP 8
===================

:PHP-RFC: 0399
:Title: Proposals For PHP 8
:Author: Unknown
:Status: Unknown
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2015-05-16
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

This page is a spot to list and discuss ideas for PHP 8. This is not a
place to discuss features which may be accepted in the 7.X series; it is
for features which require backwards compatibility breaks to achieve.

Ideas and Proposals
-------------------

Here are some ideas that have backwards compatibility implications:

-  Unify behavior of userland and internal functions.

   -  In particular when internal functions fail to parse argument types
      correctly they fail by returning null. Userland functions throw a
      TypeError.

-  Merge symbol tables:

   -  `Merge Class Member Symbol
      Tables </rfc/php8/merge_member_symbol_tables>`__
   -  `Merge Constant, Function, and Class Symbol
      Tables </rfc/php8/merge_symbol_tables>`__

-  Extend ``instanceof`` to work with non-classes and add new functions
   for checking type and subtype relationships e.g.
   ``($int instanceof int)`` ``is_type_of(1, 'int')``
   ``is_subtype_of('array', 'iterable')``.
-  Unify class and abstract type error behaviors when method
   incompatibilities exists; see https://3v4l.org/hamQi
-  Remove always ``true`` return when isn't helpful for some functions
   and methods; see `#75958 <https://bugs.php.net/bug.php?id=75958>`__.

Here are some feature ideas:

-  `covariant-returns-and-contravariant-parameters </rfc/covariant-returns-and-contravariant-parameters>`__
   Add parameter contravariance and return type covariance. This will
   probably change when autoloads are triggered. Additionally we
   probably want to reserve new types related to variance such as
   ``mixed``. New types in the global namespace are technically reserved
   already but in practice it would have a small BC impact.
-  JIT (link?)
-  FFI (link?)

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Extra: , Unify behavior of userland and internal functions. - In particular when internal functions fail to parse argument types correctly they fail by returning null. Userland functions throw a TypeError., Extend ``instanceof`` to work with non-classes and add new functions for checking type and subtype relationships e.g. ``($int instanceof int)`` ``is_type_of(1, 'int')`` ``is_subtype_of('array', 'iterable')``., Unify class and abstract type error behaviors when method incompatibilities exists; see https://3v4l.org/hamQi, Remove always ``true`` return when isn't helpful for some functions and methods; see `#75958 <https://bugs.php.net/bug.php?id=75958>`__.
:Merge Symbol Tables: - `Merge Class Member Symbol Tables <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/php8/merge_member_symbol_tables>`__ - `Merge Constant, Function, and Class Symbol Tables <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/php8/merge_symbol_tables>`__
:Slug: php8
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/php8
