Additional Soft Reservations For PHP 7
======================================

:PHP-RFC: 0403
:Title: Additional Soft Reservations For PHP 7
:Author: Nikita Popov <nikic@php.net>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2015-07-03
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

A number of type names were already `soft-reserved for PHP
7 <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/reserve_even_more_types_in_php_7>`__, which
means that we reserve the right to introduce these in a minor release
and as such strongly discourage their use, however no actual error or
warning will be thrown if they are used against this recommendation.
This RFC proposes a number of additional soft reservations, which have
been previously missed.

Each of the proposed reservations is listed separately in the following.
Votes will also happen separately. This RFC is open to additional
suggestions.

Reservations
------------

All reservations are case-insensitive.

void
~~~~

**Where**: As the last segment of a class, interface or trait name. As
such the names ``Void`` and ``Foo\Bar\Void`` are reserved, while
``Foo\Bar\MyVoid`` and ``Void\Foo\Bar`` are okay.

**Why**: ``void`` is a likely candidate for the demarcation of void
functions (which do not return a value). Alternatively ``null`` can be
used for this purpose, which is already reserved. However both
possibilities should be kept open until we reach a decision on this
question.

enum
~~~~

**Where**: In any context which is not protected by the `context
sensitivity RFC <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/context_sensitive_lexer>`__.
This includes any segment of class, interface, trait and function names.

**Why**: There already is an `enum
RFC <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/enum>`__ which will be proposed for PHP
7.x and requires this reserved keyword.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

Code using the aforementioned names (in the relevant contexts) should be
changed to use a different name. However this is not strictly required.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

Votes will be per name and require 2/3 majority.

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Nikita Popov nikic@php.net
:Original Status: Under Discussion
:Previous Discussion: http://markmail.org/message/ovvnz5p2o6q7ebjl
:Slug: additional_soft_reservations_for_php7
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/additional_soft_reservations_for_php7
