Revisit Trailing Commas In Function Arguments
=============================================

:PHP-RFC: 0417
:Title: Revisit Trailing Commas In Function Arguments
:Author: Sammy Kaye Powers <me@sammyk.me>
:Status: Withdrawn
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2015-10-07
:Version: 0.1

Introduction
------------

Arrays in PHP have long since supported trailing commas.

Trailing array commas
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code:: php

   $foo = [
       'foo',
       'bar',
   ];

This makes for clean diffs and easy appending of new values in
user-land.

Unfortunately, the argument list for function/method declarations and
calls do not share the same luxury.

Declarations raise a parse error
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code:: php

   // Parse error
   function myFunc(
       $foo,
       $bar,
       ) {
     /* ... */
   }

Calls raise a parse error
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code:: php

   // Parse error
   myFunc(
       $foo,
       $bar,
       );

Proposal
--------

This RFC proposes allowing function/method declarations and calls to
allow for trailing commas in order to:

#. Offer a consistent API and match the existing array functionality.
#. Make it easy to append new arguments in user-land.
#. Have cleaner diffs (so only one line shows up as being modified when
   appending arguments instead of two).
#. Match what `HHVM did a while
   ago <https://github.com/facebook/hiphop-php/commit/c1b7da6a4c128af5ddfc75f515c205de9f417a1e>`__.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

This change would have no breaking changes.

Proposed PHP Version
--------------------

PHP 7.1

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

Project requires a 2/3 majority.

Patches and Tests
-----------------

The `original patch by Sara
Golemon <https://github.com/sgolemon/php-src/compare/master...trailing-comma>`__.

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:First Published At: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/trailing-comma-function-args
:Original Authors: Sammy Kaye Powers, me@sammyk.me
:Original Status: Withdrawn in favor of `Trailing Commas In List Syntax <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/list-syntax-trailing-commas>`__ RFC
:Slug: revisit-trailing-comma-function-args
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/revisit-trailing-comma-function-args
