Kill Real
=========

:PHP-RFC: 0418
:Title: Kill Real
:Author: Kalle Sommer Nielsen <kalle@php.net>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2015-10-26
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

This RFC is about killing the third and uncommon alias 'real' alias for
float/doubles.

Proposal
--------

This RFC proposes to remove the 'real' alias that exists for double and
floats. PHP supports floating point decimals which always are
represented as 'float' when you var_dump() it. However 2 aliases exists
to compliment this, these are 'double' and 'real'.

The 'real' alias is often forgotten and very rarely used. An example is
that the scalar type hinting available as of PHP 7.0.0, doesn't support
'real' (or 'double' too for the matter).

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

The '(real)' type cast and the alias function 'is_real()' will be
removed.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

Proposed is to deprecate both the type cast and the alias in 7.1, making
them emit an E_DEPRECATED notice and remove them in 7.2.

RFC Impact
----------

To SAPIs
~~~~~~~~

None

To Existing Extensions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

None

To Opcache
~~~~~~~~~~

None

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

Proposed voting choices are:

\* Remove in 7.1 \* Deprecate in 7.1, remove in 7.2 \* Keep them

Although this touches the language syntax due to the type cast, I
believe this only would require a 50%+1 majority (please correct if this
is wrong).

Patches and Tests
-----------------

A patch will be created once the voting period is over.

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Kalle Sommer Nielsen kalle@php.net
:Slug: kill_real
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/kill_real
