Resource Typehint
=================

:PHP-RFC: 0421
:Title: Resource Typehint
:Author: Ben Scholzen <mail@dasprids.de>
:Status: Withdrawn
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2015-11-11
:Version: 0.1

Introduction
------------

So far, every PHP type is supported by both parameter typehints and
return types, except resources. This RFC should close this gap.

Proposal
--------

The \``resource`\` typehint and return type should be added to the
engine, working the same way like \``is_resource()`\` does. This would
also mean to make \``resource`\` a reserved classname.

.. code:: php

   function should_return_resource(): resource {
       return true; // Return value of should_return_resource() must be of the type resource, boolean returned
   }

.. code:: php

   function only_accepts_resource(resource $foo) {
   }

   only_accepts_resource(fopen('php://memory', 'w'));

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

This RFC adds \``resource`\` as reserved classname. This may collide
with existing classes which are neither namespaced nor prefixed.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

This is proposed for the next minor version of PHP, currently PHP 7.1.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

As this is a language change, a 2/3 majority is required. The vote is a
straight Yes/No vote for accepting the RFC and merging the patch.

Patches and Tests
-----------------

Considered final patch: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/1631

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Ben Scholzen, mail@dasprids.de
:Original Status: Under Discussion
:Slug: resource_typehint
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/resource_typehint
