Null Coalescing Assignment Operator
===================================

:PHP-RFC: 0453
:Title: Null Coalescing Assignment Operator
:Author: Midori Kocak <mtkocak@gmail.com>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2016-03-09
:PHP-Version: 7.4
:Version: 0.1.0

Introduction
------------

Combined assignment operators have been around since 1970's, appearing
first in the C Programming Language. For example, ``$x = $x + 3`` can be
shortened to ``$x += 3``. With PHP being a web focused language, the
``??`` operator is often used to check something's existence like
``$username = $_GET['user'] ?? 'nobody';`` However, because variable
names are often much longer than $username, the use of ?? for self
assignment creates repeated code, like
``$this->request->data['comments']['user_id'] = $this->request->data['comments']['user_id'] ?? ‘value’;``.
It is also intuitive to use combined assignment operator null coalesce
checking for self assignment.

Proposal
--------

Despite ``??`` coalescing operator being a comparison operator, coalesce
equal or ``??=``\ operator is an assignment operator. If the left
parameter is null, assigns the value of the right paramater to the left
one. If the value is not null, nothing is made.

.. code:: php

   // The folloving lines are doing the same
   $this->request->data['comments']['user_id'] = $this->request->data['comments']['user_id'] ?? 'value';
   // Instead of repeating variables with long names, the equal coalesce operator is used
   $this->request->data['comments']['user_id'] ??= 'value';

The value of right-hand parameter is copied if the left-hand parameter
is null.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

This proposed for the next PHP 7.x.

Patches and Tests
-----------------

A pull request with a working implementation, targeting master, is here:
https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/1795

Vote
----

As this is a language change, a 2/3 majority is required. A straight
Yes/No vote is being held.

Voting started at 2016/03/24 16:08 and will be closed at 2016/04/02.

Question: Approve Equal Null Coalesce Operator RFC and merge patch into master?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

References
----------

Links to external references, discussions or RFCs

http://programmers.stackexchange.com/questions/134118/why-are-shortcuts-like-x-y-considered-good-practice

Rejected Features
-----------------

Keep this updated with features that were discussed on the mail lists.

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Midori Kocak, mtkocak@gmail.com
:Original Status: Implemented (in PHP 7.4)
:Slug: null_coalesce_equal_operator
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/null_coalesce_equal_operator
