Merge Nikita Popov Into Core
============================

:PHP-RFC: 0458
:Title: Merge Nikita Popov Into Core
:Author: That's a bit personal ...
:Status: Active
:Type: Informational
:Created: 2016-03-29
:Version: 0.0.1

Introduction
------------

Modern PHP is a manifestation of the best parts of the consciousness of
its contributors.

That totally blew your mind, right ?

Proposal
--------

We propose that, after a minimum of 42 lines of any contributors code is
merged into PHP, they should become eligible to have their consciousness
merged into the core, in its entirety.

We further propose that after an arbitrary and as yet undecided upper
limit, merging consciousness with the core becomes mandatory.

We propose that whatever the limit, Nikita must have breached it, and
should be the first contributor to be merged mandatorily.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

PHP 6.0

RFC Impact
----------

To SAPIs
~~~~~~~~

SAPIs will benefit from the full glory of integration.

To Existing Extensions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All good things.

To Opcache
~~~~~~~~~~

Opcache will be provided with its own unicorn.

Open Issues
-----------

Science.

Future Scope
------------

The future will be totally sweet ...

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

Choices:

-  Merge Nikita into core.
-  Merge Nikita into core, and build a large wall around internals, at
   the expense of the Ruby community.

Voting will be mandatory. A 1/42 minority is required.

Implementation
--------------

When Nikita provides a patch, we will link to it.

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: That's a bit personal ...
:Original Status: Awaiting Scientific Breakthroughs
:Slug: nikita_popov
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/nikita_popov
