Replace "Missing Argument" Warning With "Too Few Arguments" Exception
=====================================================================

:PHP-RFC: 0487
:Title: Replace "Missing Argument" Warning With "Too Few Arguments" Exception
:Author: Dmitry Stogov <dmitry@zend.com>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2016-06-01
:PHP-Version: 7.1
:Version: 0.9

Introduction
------------

Historically, PHP allows calling functions with fewer actual parameters
than required by the function definition. These "non-passed" arguments
lead to warning emission and continuation of function execution with
uninitialized arguments.

.. code:: php

   function foo($a) {
      var_dump($a);   // NULL + Warning: Undefined variable: a 
      var_dump($a);   // NULL + Warning: Undefined variable: a
   }
   foo();             // Warning: Missing argument 1 for foo()

This strange behavior:

-  allows execution of functions with unexpected input data (nobody
   checks isset() for all arguments)
-  doesn't have real use cases (in any case, foo($a = null) is better)
-  may lead to warning bloating
-  disables obvious optimization opportunities

Proposal
--------

I propose to disable calling "user" functions with insufficient actual
parameters. PHP will throw an "Error" exception instead.

.. code:: php

   function foo($a) {
      var_dump($a);   // not executed
      var_dump($a);   // not executed
   }
   foo();             // throw Error("Too few arguments to function foo(), 0 passed in %s on line %d and exactly 1 expected")

Using this approach, all attempts to call functions with unexpected
input data are going to be caught as soon as possible.

Behavior of internal functions is not going to be changed.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

The BC break in intended.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

PHP 7.1

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

The vote is a straight Yes/No vote, that requires a 2/3 majority. The
voting began on Jun 6 and will close on Jun 16.

Question: Replace
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Patches and Tests
-----------------

`PR 1928 <https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/1928>`__

Implementation
--------------

After the project is implemented, this section should contain

#. the version(s) it was merged to
#. a link to the git commit
   `ff363e2e7c58353b7e2751d1ca4d7bf616862aae <http://git.php.net/?p=php-src.git;a=commitdiff;h=ff363e2e7c58353b7e2751d1ca4d7bf616862aae>`__
#. a link to the PHP manual entry for the feature

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Dmitry Stogov, dmitry@zend.com
:Original Status: Accepted
:Slug: too_few_args
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/too_few_args
