Get_class() Disallow Null Parameter
===================================

:PHP-RFC: 0505
:Title: Get_class() Disallow Null Parameter
:Author: Danack
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2016-08-12
:PHP-Version: 7.2
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

When null is passed as the parameter to get_class() inside a class
context, the behaviour of the function can be highly surprising,

.. code:: php

   class Foo
   {
       function bar($repository)
       {
           $result = $repository->find(100);

           echo get_class($result);
       }
   }

If $result contains a valid object returned from the repository, the
output will be of the class name of the type of $result.

If $result contains null, the output will be of the class context where
get_class() was called from, in this case "Foo".

This feature violates the `Principle of least
astonishment <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Principle_of_least_astonishment>`__:
"if a necessary feature has a high astonishment factor, it may be
necessary to redesign the feature."

Proposal
--------

Disallow null being passed to the function as a valid parameter. If
get_class() is called with null as the parameter, a warning will be
emitted:

::

   Warning: get_class() expects parameter 1 to be object, null given in %s on line %d

I.e. the valid ways to call the function will be:

-  without any parameter.
-  with an object as the parameter.

Those two options will continue to have the same behaviour they
currently have.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

Most people won't see a BC break, as for the majority of people, passing
null to this function is not a desired behaviour.

For people who do deliberately pass null to the function they will need
to refactor their code from:

.. code:: php

   $x = get_class($some_value_that_may_be_null);

to:

.. code:: php

   if ($some_value_that_may_be_null === null) {
       $x = get_class();
   }
   else {
       $x = get_class($some_value_that_may_be_null);
   }

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

7.2

Voting
------

Should the get_class() function be changed to disallow null being passed
as a parameter? As it is not a language or syntax change, the vote will
pass if 50%+1 vote yes.

Question: get_class() disallow null parameter
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Voting ended on the 8th October 2016 9pm UTC

null vs default param
---------------------

When this topic was discussed before, it came as a surprise to some
people that PHP can tell the difference between passing null and having
a default value be null. This is perfectly possible in both internal
code, as well as userland code:

.. code:: php

   function get_class($item = null)
   {
       if (func_num_args() == 0) {
           return get_current_scope_name();
       }
       if ($item === null) {
           trigger_error("get_class passed null, which is not an object.");
       }

       if (is_object($item) == false) {
           trigger_error("value is not an object");
           return false;
       }

       return gettype($item);
   }

Patches and Tests
-----------------

https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/2082

Implementation
--------------

After the project is implemented, this section should contain

#. This was merged for PHP 7.2
#. https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/2082/commits/86aa1c784d3b584e6d0c235870a882c8fd169a74
#. https://secure.php.net/manual/en/function.get-class.php#refsect1-function.get-class-changelog

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Danack
:Original Status: Implemented (in PHP 7.2)
:Slug: get_class_disallow_null_parameter
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/get_class_disallow_null_parameter
