Arrow Functions
===============

:PHP-RFC: 0507
:Title: Arrow Functions
:Author: Bob Weinand <bwoebi@php.net>
:Status: Withdrawn
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2016-08-14
:Version: 1.3

This RFC is an alternative proposal to Bob Weinand's `Short
Closures </rfc/short_closures>`__ RFC which contains a lot of relevant
information. This RFC will reference the short_closures RFC several
times so readers should be familiar with it.

Introduction
------------

Anonymous functions and closures can be verbose even though sometimes
they are quite simple and contain only a single expression.
Additionally, importing variables into the closure's scope is manual and
is painful overhead for single-expression closures. In practice these
single-expression closures are common. This RFC proposes a more concise
syntax for this pattern.

As an example of the declaration overhead, consider this function that
`I found
online <https://github.com/darkskillfr/near2u/blob/5a606fc9082c33c7270d37e4c7d29160586285f8/serveur/lib.php>`__:

.. code:: php

   function array_values_from_keys($arr, $keys) {
       return array_map(function ($x) use ($arr) { return $arr[$x]; }, $keys);
   }

The closure performs a single operation ``$arr[$x]`` and is 8 characters
but requires 30 other characters (excluding whitespace). This means that
roughly 79% of the closure's code is overhead (30/38). For this RFC
these extra characters are called 'boilerplate'. This RFC proposes arrow
functions to reduce the amount of boilerplate by having a shorter syntax
and importing used variables from the outer scope implicitly. Using
arrow functions from this RFC this would reduce to the following:

.. code:: php

   function array_values_from_keys($arr, $keys) {
       return array_map(fn($x) => $arr[$x], $keys);
   }

This reduces the amount of boilerplate from 30 characters down to 8.

See more examples in the `Examples <#examples>`__ section. The `longer
examples <#longer_examples>`__ may be helpful to those struggling to
understand why the RFC authors care about saving symbols and clarity on
each closure.

Many other languages have ways to write closures in a succinct form as
well. TODO: decide how much summary of this topic should be given here.
At minimum provide links to closure documentation for a few other
relevant and major languages?

Proposal
--------

Arrow functions have the following form:

.. code:: php

   fn(parameter_list) => expr

The ``expr`` is a single expression. This expression will be evaluated
and then the result will be returned:

.. code:: php

   $mul2 = fn($x) => $x * 2;

   $mul2(3); // evaluates to 6

When a variable in the expression is defined in the parent scope it will
be captured implicitly by-value. In the following example the functions
identified by ``$versionA`` and ``$versionB`` are exactly equivalent:

.. code:: php

   $y = 1;

   $versionA = fn($x) => $x + $y;

   $versionB = function ($x) use ($y) {
       return $x + $y;
   };

Note that searching for variables to close over will descend into nested
arrow functions and ``use`` sections of inline functions. This
functionality is not expected to be common but is supported.

Arrow functions are similar to those found in EcmaScript 2015 (ES6) [1]_
and lambda expressions from C# [2]_.

Type Declarations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This RFC does support type declarations for parameters and return types.
This issue was noted multiple times on the mailing list during the short
closures RFC as something that bothered voters. Therefore this RFC
permits them but the authors discourage their general use in arrow
functions.

Here are some examples to show the syntax:

.. code:: php

   fn (array $x) => $x
   fn (): int => 42

References
~~~~~~~~~~

Parameters and return values can be passed/returned by reference. As
mentioned elsewhere, implicitly bound variables will be bound *by value*
and not *by reference*. References go in the usual places:

.. code:: php

   fn &(array &$xs) => $xs

Static Arrow Functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The implementation currently supports static closures, for example
``static fn($x) => static::get($x)``. While supported it is uncertain
whether it should be included in the final version. Having the
implementation support it allows testers to determine usefulness and
value.

Ambiguities
~~~~~~~~~~~

Arrow functions have no ambiguities, including array key definitions and
yield expressions that provide a key. The ``fn`` prefix removes the
ambiguities.

Backward Incompatible Changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Unfortunately the ``fn`` keyword must be a full keyword and not just a
reserved function name; this is to break the ambiguities with ``=>`` for
array and yield keys.

Ilija Tovilo analyzed the top 1,000 PHP repositories on GitHub to find
usages of ``fn``. `The
gist <https://gist.github.com/morrisonlevi/473a7e0cb6e59c830224b1c71b8da28c>`__
provides more information, but the rough findings are that all known
existing usages of ``fn`` are in tests except one case where it is a
namespace segment.

Patches and Tests
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

An implementation with tests can be found here:
https://github.com/morrisonlevi/php-src/tree/arrow_functions. There are
no known issues with it at this time; please build and test it.

Voting
~~~~~~

Voting will be a simple Yes/No that requires 2/3 or more of the votes to
be "Yes" to be accepted.

--------------

Question: Accept arrow functions? (2/3 required)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

--------------

Examples
--------

Taken from
`silexphp/Pimple <https://github.com/silexphp/Pimple/blob/62b5d317a83b02eea42b5b785b62a29fba458bcf/src/Pimple/Container.php#L242-L244>`__:

.. code:: php

   $extended = function ($c) use ($callable, $factory) {
       return $callable($factory($c), $c);
   };

   // with arrow function:
   $extended = fn($c) => $callable($factory($c), $c);

This reduces the amount of boilerplate from 44 characters down to 8.

--------------

Taken from `Doctrine
DBAL <https://github.com/doctrine/dbal/blob/master/lib/Doctrine/DBAL/Schema/PostgreSqlSchemaManager.php>`__:

.. code:: php

   $this->existingSchemaPaths = array_filter($paths, function ($v) use ($names) {
       return in_array($v, $names);
   });

   // with arrow function
   $this->existingSchemaPaths = array_filter($paths, fn($v) => in_array($v, $names));

This reduces the amount of boilerplate from 31 characters down to 8.

--------------

The complement function as found in many libraries:

.. code:: php

   function complement(callable $f) {
       return function (... $args) use ($f) {
           return !$f(... $args);
       };
   }

   // with arrow function:
   function complement(callable $f) {
       return fn(... $args) => !$f(... $args);
   }

--------------

The following example was given to me by
`tpunt <https://gist.github.com/tpunt/b4f9bf30f43b9e148b73ce18245ab472>`__:

.. code:: php

   $result = Collection::from([1, 2])
       ->map(function ($v) {
           return $v * 2;
       })
       ->reduce(function ($tmp, $v) {
           return $tmp + $v;
       }, 0);

   echo $result; //6

   // with arrow functions:
   $result = Collection::from([1, 2])
       ->map(fn($v) => $v * 2)
       ->reduce(fn($tmp, $v) => $tmp + $v, 0);

   echo $result; //6

Future Scope: Multi-Statement Bodies
------------------------------------

Some languages permit multi-statement closures with a syntax like:

.. code:: php

   (parameter_list) => {
       stmt1;
       stmt2;
       //…
   }

In this case nothing would be automatically returned. This feature was
included in the short closures RFC but there were two primary complaints
about it:

-  If you are specifying multiple statements doesn't that work against
   the purpose of being concise and short?
-  Auditing the implicitly bound variables becomes more difficult as the
   number of statements increase.

This RFC omitted this feature for these reasons. If arrow functions are
accepted and become more common it may make sense to revisit this
feature.

.. [1]
   https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Functions/Arrow_functions

.. [2]
   https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/bb397687.aspx

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Bob Weinand bwoebi@php.net
:Slug: arrow_functions
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/arrow_functions
