Create RFC Compliant URL Parser
===============================

:PHP-RFC: 0514
:Title: Create RFC Compliant URL Parser
:Author: David Walker <dave@mudsite.com>
:Status: Withdrawn
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2016-10-04
:PHP-Version: 7.2
:Version: 0.3

Introduction
------------

This RFC came about for an attempt to resolve `Bug
#72811 <https://bugs.php.net/bug.php?id=72811>`__. In the attempt,
discussion shifted from trying to patch the current implementation of
``parse_url()`` to more generally replacing the current one. The
discussion then shifted to the inability to remove ``parse_url()`` due
to BC issues. Ideas formed on creating an immutable class that will take
a URL and parse it, exposing the pieces by getters.

The current implementation of ``parse_url()`` makes a bunch of
exceptions to `RFC 3986 <https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986>`__. I do
not know if these are conscious exceptions, or, if ``parse_url()`` was
never based off of the RFC. After raising this RFC, I was alerted that
the RFC, is complimented by `WHATWG <https://url.spec.whatwg.org>`__
spec on URLs. The aim of WHATWG is to combine RFC 3986 and `RFC
3987 <https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3987>`__. However, WHATWG is a
"Living Standard" which makes it subject to change, however frequent.
Although it does some good combining the two RFC's, the complexities to
have a single PHP parser that would require constant maintaining to
adhere to the evolving standard is not exactly practical.

So, this RFC proposes creating a new parser that adheres to the two
RFC's. In doing so, if PHP is compiled with mbstring support, would be
able to properly support multibyte characters in a URL.

Proposal
--------

.. code:: php

   <?php

   class URL {
       public function  __construct(string $url, string|URL $base);
       
       /**
        * $input - The string to be parsed
        * $base - (optional) If $url is relative, this is what it is relative to
        * $encoding_override - (optional) we assume $url is a UTF-8 encoded string, you may change it here
        * $url - (optional) A URL object that should be modified by the parsing of $input.  The return value will be this variable as well
        * $state_override - (optional) begin parting the $input from a specific state.
        */
       static public function parse(string $input[, URL $base[, int $encoding_override[, URL $url[, int $state_override]]]]) : URL;
       
       public function getScheme() : ?string;
       public function getUsername() : ?string;
       public function getPassword() : ?string;
       public function getHostname() : ?string;
       public function getPort() : ?int;
       public function getPath() : ?string;
       public function getQuery() : ?string;
       public function getFragment() : ?string;
       
       public function getAll() : array;
   }

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

None

RFC Impact
----------

To Existing Extensions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

standard

Open Issues
-----------

-  Deprecate ``parse_url()``? Try and push people into using the new
   URLParser class.
-  Should ``parse_url()`` have a sunset date of PHP8, or PHP9?

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

Requires 2/3

Implementation
--------------

After the project is implemented, this section should contain

#. the version(s) it was merged to
#. a link to the git commit(s)
#. a link to the PHP manual entry for the feature

References
----------

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: David Walker (dave@mudsite.com)
:Original PHP Version: PHP 7.2+
:Original Status: Inactive
:Slug: replace_parse_url
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/replace_parse_url
