Deprecate Png2wbmp() And Jpeg2wbmp()
====================================

:PHP-RFC: 0516
:Title: Deprecate Png2wbmp() And Jpeg2wbmp()
:Author: Christoph M. Becker <cmb@php.net>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2016-10-15
:PHP-Version: 7.2
:Version: 1.1

Introduction
------------

``png2wbmp()`` and ``jpeg2wbmp()`` are the only direct image format
conversion functions available in ext/gd which makes them rather
special, particularly as libgd doesn't offer any such functions  [1]_.
Furthermore WBMP  [2]_ has been invented to support WAP  [3]_, which
appears to be mostly obsolete nowadays.

Proposal
--------

Therefore I propose to deprecate the ``png2wbmp()`` and ``jpeg2wbmp()``
functions as of PHP 7.2, and to remove them as of PHP 8.0. During the
deprecation phase calling either function should emit an E_DEPRECATED
error.

The main benefit in doing so would be easier maintainance of the libgd
bindings
(`\_php_image_convert() <https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/PHP-7.0.12/ext/gd/gd.c#L4018-L4215>`__
alone accounts for rougly 200 lines). An additional benefit would be to
have a slightly cleaner and less confusing API (Why are there no other
conversion functions? Why don't these functions follow the general
"image" prefix rule?)

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

Obviously, code still using png2wbmp() or jpeg2wbmp() would break.
However, fallback functions could easily `implemented in
userland <http://news.php.net/php.internals/96366>`__. The supposedly
long deprecation period should give users ample time to cater to the
removal.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

-  Deprecation as of next PHP 7.x
-  Removal as of next major (supposedly PHP 8.0)

Open Issues
-----------

Currently none.

Unaffected PHP Functionality
----------------------------

``imagewbmp()`` and ``image2wbmp()`` are not subject of this RFC, and as
such their functionality will remain unmodified.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

Deprecate and remove the functions: yes or no.

This RFC requires a 50%+1 majority.

Voting ends on 2016-11-13, 22:00 UTC.

Question: Deprecate png2wbmp() and jpeg2wbmp()
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Patches and Tests
-----------------

PR implementing the deprecation:
https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/2164.

Implementation
--------------

#. PR #2164 has been merged into master (what is supposed to become
   PHP-7.2) with https://github.com/php/php-src/commit/189bbb58
#. The deprecation and removal has been documented with
   http://svn.php.net/viewvc?view=revision&revision=341003
#. `Removed for PHP
   8 <http://git.php.net/?p=php-src.git;a=commit;h=e9736638828f3037b1b04fc02718d8d04351f9e0>`__
#. The language specification is not affected by this RFC

References
----------

-  Proposal discussion:
   http://marc.info/?l=php-internals&m=147637821405185&w=2
-  RFC discussion:
   http://marc.info/?l=php-internals&m=147654153010696&w=2

.. [1]
   instead they are defined in the libgd binding using libgd's image
   reading and writing functions

.. [2]
   Wireless Application Protocol Bitmap Format

.. [3]
   Wireless Application Protocol

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Christoph M. Becker, cmb@php.net
:Original Status: Implemented (PHP 7.2)
:Slug: deprecate-png-jpeg-2wbmp
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/deprecate-png-jpeg-2wbmp
