Driver-Specific PDO Param Types
===============================

:PHP-RFC: 0517
:Title: Driver-Specific PDO Param Types
:Author: Adam Baratz <adambaratz@php.net>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2016-10-17
:Version: 0.1

Introduction
------------

Databases used with PDO can have nuances that fall outside the types
defined by PDO (the ``PDO::PARAM_*`` consts). These nuances can't always
be made transparent to the developer. A wider range of types would allow
developers to create better queries. Much like PDO supports
driver-specific attributes, it should also support driver-specific param
types.

This issue is particularly exposed to pdo_dblib users. Since pdo_dblib
relies on prepared statement emulation -- DB-Library doesn't support
prepared statements -- developers must build queries as they should be
executed by the server. There have been a
`couple <https://bugs.php.net/bug.php?id=60818>`__
`issues <https://bugs.php.net/bug.php?id=67495>`__ logged related to
this. The current workaround is to use
`CAST <https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ms187928.aspx>`__ (or
implicit casts) with the existing data types. Doing so adds cost to
queries.

Proposal
--------

By adding a placeholder value to `enum
pdo_param_type <https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/master/ext/pdo/php_pdo_driver.h#L51>`__,
PDO drivers can add types as they see fit. The PR contains two examples
of how this would be used with pdo_dblib.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

No modifications are needed to the supported PDO drivers, but they would
have to be rebuilt against this API change. Other drivers might have to
be modified if they make assumptions about the structure of
``enum pdo_param_type``.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

Next PHP 7.x.

New Constants
-------------

The example code introduces the following constants:

-  PDO::DBLIB_ATTR_UNICODE_STRINGS
-  PDO::DBLIB_PARAM_BINARY
-  PDO::DBLIB_PARAM_STR_UNICODE
-  PDO::DBLIB_PARAM_STR_ASCII

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

This project requires a 50%+1 majority.

Patches and Tests
-----------------

Working implementation, with tests:
https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/2168

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Adam Baratz adambaratz@php.net
:Original Status: Under Discussion
:Slug: driver-specific-pdo-param-types
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/driver-specific-pdo-param-types
