Throwable Error Code's Type Generalization
==========================================

:PHP-RFC: 0532
:Title: Throwable Error Code's Type Generalization
:Author: WesNetmo
:Status: Declined
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2016-12-18
:Version: 0.1

Introduction
------------

Currently ``Exception::$code``, ``Error::$code`` and
``Throwable::getCode()`` are said to be ``int`` only, but this is
actually violated by PHP itself, specifically by the PDO extension,
whose error codes are strings instead.

As such, code that assumes that the interface always uses ``int`` is
already potentially broken - because it doesn't special-case PDO - or it
does already special-case the type so that PDO's errors don't create
issues.

Proposal
--------

As this inconsistency is present, this RFC proposes to generalize the
Throwable's code so that it can be of any type - not just ``int``. In
practice this is mostly a documentation change because the ``int`` type
is `never enforced <https://3v4l.org/BoF4U>`__, except for ``Exception``
and ``Error`` constructors.

Throwables' codes are normally not needed, and even if they were,
numeric ones aren't comfortable to work with. Allowing any type can open
up to new possibilities for this property that is currently almost
useless, like Enum/EnumSet-like objects, strings, etc.

Specifically, the following members are proposed to be modified:

-  ``Throwable::getCode(): mixed;``
-  ``Error::__construct(string $message = "", mixed $code = 0, Throwable $previous = null);``
-  ``Exception::__construct(string $message = "", mixed $code = 0, Throwable $previous = null);``
-  ``protected mixed Error::$code;``
-  ``protected mixed Exception::$code;``

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

None.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

7.2

Voting
------

2/3 majority is required. Voting will end on 27th of Jan.

Question: Accept Throwables error code generalization?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Patches and Tests
-----------------

N/A

References
----------

`Discussion on externals.io <http://externals.io/thread/573>`__

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Wes (@WesNetmo on Twitter)
:Slug: throwable-code-generalization
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/throwable-code-generalization
