Deprecate And Remove INTL_IDNA_VARIANT_2003
===========================================

:PHP-RFC: 0535
:Title: Deprecate And Remove INTL_IDNA_VARIANT_2003
:Author: Christoph M. Becker <cmb@php.net>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2017-01-07
:PHP-Version: 7.2
:Version: 1.1

Introduction
------------

As of ICU 55.1 (released 2015-04-01) the `IDNA2003 APIs are
deprecated <http://source.icu-project.org/repos/icu/icu/tags/release-55-1/APIChangeReport.html#deprecated>`__,
because `UTS #46 should be preferred over the obsolete IDNA 2003
variant <https://sourceforge.net/p/icu/mailman/message/32980778/>`__.
However, the intl extension still uses INTL_IDNA_VARIANT_2003 as default
for
`idn_to_ascii() <http://php.net/manual/en/function.idn-to-ascii.php>`__
and
`idn_to_utf8() <http://php.net/manual/en/function.idn-to-utf8.php>`__,
which should be changed as soon as possible.

Proposal
--------

Therefore I suggest the following procedure:

-  *PHP 7.2*: deprecate INTL_IDNA_VARIANT_2003
-  *PHP 7.4*: change the default of idn_to_ascii()'s and idn_to_utf8()'s
   $variant parameter to INTL_IDNA_VARIANT_UTS46
-  *PHP 8.0*: remove support for INTL_IDNA_VARIANT_2003 altogether

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

Obviously, code explicitly using INTL_IDNA_VARIANT_2003 would break
(during PHP 7 only with regard to triggering a deprecation notice), and
code relying on the default variant might break (however, it might be
"magically" fixed as well).

RFC Impact
----------

Besides the obvious behavioral changes to idn_to_ascii() an
idn_to_utf8() there is no further impact on SAPIs, extensions or
OPcache.

Open Issues
-----------

None.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

Whether to implement the proposal above, or not.

This RFC requires a 2/3 majority. Voting starts on 2017-01-31T12:30Z and
ends on 2017-02-14T12:30Z.

Question: Deprecate and remove INTL_IDNA_VARIANT_2003
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Patches and Tests
-----------------

`PR implementing the
deprecation <https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/2355>`__.

Implementation
--------------

#. PR #2355 has been merged into master (which is supposed to become
   PHP-7.2) with `commit
   6cfbb7f9 <https://github.com/php/php-src/commit/6cfbb7f9bd4576f8f6172a33d49e7498b3b617e1>`__.
#. The PHP manual has been
   `updated <http://svn.php.net/viewvc?view=revision&revision=341894>`__.
   The migration guide will be written based on UPGRADING, which already
   has a respective note.
#. `Removed for PHP
   8 <http://git.php.net/?p=php-src.git;a=commit;h=3d15a6f86b56c8acbf7363fb5e70a054918dbd64>`__

References
----------

-  `First introduction on
   internals <http://marc.info/?t=148001209500002&r=1&w=2>`__
-  `Discussion thread on
   internals <http://marc.info/?t=148379802600002&r=1&w=2>`__

Rejected Features
-----------------

None.

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Christoph M. Becker, cmb@php.net
:Slug: deprecate-and-remove-intl_idna_variant_2003
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/deprecate-and-remove-intl_idna_variant_2003
