Arrays Starting With A Negative Index
=====================================

:PHP-RFC: 0548
:Title: Arrays Starting With A Negative Index
:Author: Pedro Magalhães <pmmaga@php.net>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2017-04-20
:PHP-Version: 8.0
:Version: 0.4

Introduction
------------

On the documentation for ``array_fill`` the ``start_index`` description
mentions: "If ``start_index`` is negative, the first index of the
returned array will be ``start_index`` and the following indices will
start from zero." This is consistent everywhere when an explicit
negative key is used and implicit keys are used afterwards.

Proposal
--------

In other words, any array that has a number ``n`` as it's first numeric
key will have for it's next implicit key either ``n+1`` if ``n >= 0`` or
``0`` if ``n < 0``. This RFC proposes to make this consistent by always
using ``n+1`` regardless of the sign of ``n``.

As also mentioned on the relevant part of the `arrays
documentation <http://php.net/manual/en/language.types.array.php>`__:

   if no key is specified, the maximum of the existing integer indices
   is taken, and the new key will be that maximum value plus 1 (but at
   least 0).

This RFC proposes to eliminate the parenthesis part of that sentence.
Which is an exception to a rule, that people have to learn one way or
the other.

This proposal targets 8.0. However, to ease the transition and find
places where this may become an issue, there is a secondary vote for
emitting a deprecation notice in cases where the behavior will change.

All the variables in this code:

.. code:: php

   <?php

   $a = array_fill(-2, 3, true);
   $b = [-2 => true, true, true];
   $c = ["string" => true, -2 => true, true, true];
   unset($c["string"]);
   $d[-2] = true;
   $d[] = true;
   $d[] = true;

Result in the array:

.. code:: php

   array(3) {
     [-2]=>
     bool(true)
     [0]=>
     bool(true)
     [1]=>
     bool(true)
   }

    NOTE: If accepted, during the deprecation phase the following
    ``E_DEPRECATED`` notice would be emitted in cases where the behavior
    will change:

    ::

    Deprecated: In the next major version of PHP the implicit keys of
    this array will start from -1 instead of 0 in ...

With the implementation of this RFC, they will all result in:

.. code:: php

   array(3) {
     [-2]=>
     bool(true)
     [-1]=>
     bool(true)
     [0]=>
     bool(true)
   }

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

Code that relies on the current behavior to access array elements with
an explicit key after that array has been started with a negative index
and used implicit keys afterwards will change it's behavior. Example:

.. code:: php

   <?php

   $a[-2] = true; // Current: Key is -2, RFC: Key is -2
   $a[] = true; // Current: Key is 0, RFC: Key is -1
   $a[] = true; // Current: Key is 1, RFC: Key is 0

   if ($a[1] === true) {
       echo 'Accessing key 1 explicitly';
   }

Will no longer output ``Accessing key 1 explicitly``.

    NOTE: If accepted, during the deprecation phase the ``E_DEPRECATED``
    notice mentioned in the previous section would be emitted.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

PHP 8.0 (Deprecation notice for 7.3)

Unaffected PHP Functionality
----------------------------

Arrays with explicit keys, string keys, or an initial numeric index
``>= -1`` are not affected. This also means that arrays that never use
explicit keys will still start with ``0``.

Furthermore, iterating over arrays without explicit keys (ie.
``foreach``) is not affected.

Voting Choices
--------------

Both votes require a 2/3 majority.

Question: Arrays starting with a negative index for 8.0
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-1:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

--------------

Question: Deprecation notice for 7.3
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-2:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

    The previous vote targeting 7.2 was closed with 14 for and 16
    against

Patches and Tests
-----------------

This RFC is implemented by the following patches:

#. Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/2383
#. Documentation: *WIP*

References
----------

Version 0.3:

Discussion on the mailing list: https://externals.io/message/98302

First proposal Voting period discussion:
https://externals.io/message/99412

Second proposal Voting period discussion:
https://externals.io/message/99511

--------------

Version 0.4:

Discussion on the mailing list: https://externals.io/message/101861

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Pedro Magalhães, pmmaga@php.net
:Slug: negative_array_index
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/negative_array_index
