Deprecate PDO::PARAM_NULL
=========================

:PHP-RFC: 0551
:Title: Deprecate PDO::PARAM_NULL
:Author: Adam Baratz <adambaratz@php.net>
:Status: Withdrawn
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2017-05-15
:Version: 0.1

Introduction
------------

PDO defines a NULL type, but this concept is not part of the SQL
standard. Types are nullable, but there is no type that can only have
that value.

The presence of this type is potentially confusing to users. Supporting
it adds some weight to PDO. A handful of people on the internals mail
list have asked for it to be removed.

Proposal
--------

Uses of ``PDO::PARAM_NULL`` in the next PHP 7.x would result in
deprecation notices. The const and related code would be removed in PHP
7.x+1.

Notices could be produced by these methods:

-  ``PDO::quote``
-  ``PDOStatement::bindColumn``
-  ``PDOStatement::bindParam``
-  ``PDOStatement::bindValue``

None of the supported PDO drivers rely on this type to bind null values.
It's functionally equivalent to use null with any of the other types. I
found four drivers on Pecl with PHP7 support: msphpsql, pdo_ibm,
pdo_informix, pdo_sqlanywhere. Some will require modifications to
compile once this const is removed, but they won't lose functionality
either.

Put another way, any code like this:

.. code:: php

   $statement->bindValue(1, null, PDO::PARAM_NULL);

Can be replaced by this:

.. code:: php

   $statement->bindValue(1, null);

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

This project requires a 50%+1 majority.

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Adam Baratz adambaratz@php.net
:Original Status: Under Discussion
:Slug: deprecate_pdo_null
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/deprecate_pdo_null
