Improved SSL / TLS Constants
============================

:PHP-RFC: 0552
:Title: Improved SSL / TLS Constants
:Author: Niklas Keller <me@kelunik.com>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2017-05-15
:PHP-Version: 7.2
:Version: 0.1.1

Introduction
------------

This RFC proposes to change PHP's TLS constants to sane values. This
change has been avoided by the `previous RFC for PHP
5.6 <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/improved-tls-defaults>`__ due to BC
reasons. This RFCs favors better security instead of backwards
compatibility with version intolerant and out of date servers.

Proposal
--------

-  Make ``tls://`` default to TLSv1.0 + TLSv1.1 + TLSv1.2
-  Make ``ssl://`` an alias of ``tls://``
-  Make ``STREAM_CRYPTO_METHOD_TLS_*`` constants default to TLSv1.0 +
   TLSv1.1 + TLSv1.2 instead of TLSv1.0 only

``STREAM_CRYPTO_METHOD_TLS_*`` will be changed in the future when newer
versions of TLS are available without going through the RFC process.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

This might break connection attempts to TLS servers with only TLS 1.0
enabled and that are version intolerant at the same time. This also
breaks ``ssl://`` wrapper connections if only SSL is supported by the
remote host, but no TLS. While strongly discouraged, an explicit context
option passing
``STREAM_CRYPTO_METHOD_SSLv2_* | STREAM_CRYPTO_METHOD_SSLv3_* | STREAM_CRYPTO_METHOD_TLS``
can be used to restore the old behavior.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

This change will be merged into 7.2 if accepted.

Future Scope
------------

In the future ``STREAM_CRYPTO_METHOD_SSLv23_CLIENT`` should be
deprecated and SSL support completely removed.

Voting
------

This is a simple 50%+1 vote with yes and no options. The voting started
on 29th of May 2017 and will end on 5th of June 2017.

Question: Improved SSL / TLS constants
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Patches and Tests
-----------------

-  https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/2518
-  https://github.com/php/php-src/commit/bec91e1117fd3527897cde2f8a26eab9a20fa3dc

References
----------

-  https://externals.io/thread/864

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Niklas Keller, me@kelunik.com
:Original Status: Merged to 7.2
:Slug: improved-tls-constants
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/improved-tls-constants
