Same Site Cookie
================

:PHP-RFC: 0566
:Title: Same Site Cookie
:Author: Frederik Bosch <f.bosch@genkgo.nl>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2017-07-16
:PHP-Version: 7.3
:Version: 0.9

Introduction
------------

Same-site cookies allow servers to mitigate the risk of CSRF and
information leakage attacks by asserting that a particular cookie should
only be sent with requests initiated from the same registrable domain.
The technology is currently `a proposed web
standard <https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-west-first-party-cookies-07>`__.
However, same site cookies are already adopted by Chrome and planned by
`planned by Firefox <https://caniuse.com/#search=samesite>`__. Major PHP
frameworks already implemented this through a custom Set-Cookie header
call. The RFC will try to convince voters that same site cookies should
be available as a core language feature.

How the samesite flag works
---------------------------

Cookies are issued using the Set-Cookie header. When issuing a cookie,
one can set a key and value together with flags for the browser to
determine whether the cookie should be accessible. A typical cookie
might look like this.

::

   Set-Cookie: key=value; path=/; domain=example.org; HttpOnly

As many will know, this opens doors for CSRF attacks, an attack that
forces an end user to execute unwanted actions on a web application in
which they're currently authenticated. Authentication state is saved
through the use of (session) cookies. The cookie is the key for having
access to the application. When using samesite, the developer can
specify if and when the cookie should be accessible when a request
originates from another registrable domain.

According to the proposed standard, there are now two possibilities for
a cookie that is using the samesite flag: "Lax" and "Strict". The
difference between Lax and Strict is the accessibility of the cookie in
requests originating from another registrable domain using the HTTP GET
method. Cookies using Lax will be accessible in a **GET** request
originated from another registrable domain, whereas cookies using Strict
will not be accessible in a GET request originated from another
registrable domain. There is no difference with POST methods: the
browser should not allow the cookie to be accessed in a POST request
originating from another registrable domain.

A cookie that is issued using the samesite flag, might look as follows.

::

   Set-Cookie: key=value; path=/; domain=example.org; HttpOnly; SameSite=Lax

Proposal
--------

In order to add this ``samesite`` flag when issuing cookies, four core
functions will be affected by this RFC.

#. setcookie
#. setrawcookie
#. session_set_cookie_params
#. session_get_cookie_params

The first three functions have a similar function signature. This RFC
proposes two possibilities to change these three functions. The first
possibility is to add an additional argument to these functions. The
second possibility is to allow an array of options in which all the
cookie options will be moved into.

When voting, one can decide to (a) accept/reject the RFC via the
additional argument (b) accept/reject the RFC via the array of options
solution.

setcookie
~~~~~~~~~

1. Add an additional ``samesite`` argument to the setcookie function.

.. code:: php

   bool setcookie ( string $name [, string $value = "" [, int $expire = 0 [, string $path = "" [, string $domain = "" [, bool $secure = false [, bool $httponly = false [, string $samesite = "" ]]]]]]] )

2. Modify setcookie as such that the function also allows an array of
options. The keys within $options that have affect to the Set-Cookie
header are: path, domain, secure, httponly and samesite. The default
values for these options will remain untouched. The default value for
samesite will be the empty string.

.. code:: php

   bool setcookie ( string $name [, string $value = "" [, int $expire = 0 [, string $path = "" [, string $domain = "" [, bool $secure = false [, bool $httponly = false]]]]]] )
   bool setcookie ( string $name [, string $value = "" [, int $expire = 0 [, array $options ]]] )

setrawcookie
~~~~~~~~~~~~

1. Add an additional ``samesite`` argument to the setrawcookie function.

.. code:: php

   bool setrawcookie ( string $name [, string $value [, int $expire = 0 [, string $path [, string $domain [, bool $secure = false [, bool $httponly = false [, string $samesite = "" ] ]]]]]] )

2. Modify setrawcookie as such that the function also allows an array of
options. The keys within $options that have affect to the Set-Cookie
header are: path, domain, secure, httponly and samesite. The default
values for these options will remain untouched. The default value for
samesite will be the empty string.

.. code:: php

   bool setrawcookie ( string $name [, string $value = "" [, int $expire = 0 [, string $path = "" [, string $domain = "" [, bool $secure = false [, bool $httponly = false]]]]]] )
   bool setrawcookie ( string $name [, string $value = "" [, int $expire = 0 [, array $options ]]] )

session_set_cookie_params
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1. Add an additional ``samesite`` argument to the
session_set_cookie_param function.

.. code:: php

   void session_set_cookie_params ( int $lifetime [, string $path [, string $domain [, bool $secure = false [, bool $httponly = false [, string $samesite = "" ]]]]] )

2. Modify session_set_cookie_param as such that the function also allows
an array of options. The keys within $options that have affect to the
Set-Cookie header are: path, domain, secure, httponly and samesite. The
default values for these options will remain untouched. The default
value for samesite will be the empty string.

.. code:: php

   void session_set_cookie_params ( int $lifetime [, string $path [, string $domain [, bool $secure = false [, bool $httponly = false ]]]] )
   void session_set_cookie_params ( int $lifetime [, array $options ] )

session_get_cookie_params
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The return value of the session_get_cookie_params function will have an
extra key ``samesite`` in the returned array.

.. code:: php

   array(
     "lifetime" => 0,             // The lifetime of the cookie in seconds.
     "path" => "/",               // The path where information is stored.
     "domain" => "example.org",   // The domain of the cookie.
     "secure" => true,            // The cookie should only be sent over secure connections.
     "httponly" => true,          // The cookie can only be accessed through the HTTP protocol.
     "samesite" => "Strict"       // The cookie can only be accessed if it was initiated from the same registrable domain.
   )

Pros and cons: why or why not to adopt this RFC
-----------------------------------------------

The first and foremost reasons to accept this RFC is that developers
will be able to better secure their PHP applications. It fits the step
PHP is already making with the upcoming availability of libsodium. With
this feature, the language would make another step in helping developers
to write secure code.

But, there is a risk involved when using samesite *as additional
argument* to setcookie, setrawcookie and session_set_cookie_params. The
samesite cookie might not become a standard which might lead browsers to
eventually drop the flag. If that would be the case, the ``setcookie``,
``setrawcookie`` and ``session_set_cookie_params`` functions would have
a useless samesite argument. For the record, the HttpOnly flag became a
standard in 2011. The argument to set(raw)cookie function was already
added with PHP 5.2.0 in November 2006, almost 5 years ahead of the
standard.

Furthermore, I should point out that the setcookie, setrawcookie and
session_set_cookie_params functions are becoming lengthy functions when
another parameter will be added. But one can argue that this is the
*result of the design of the function itself*. To overcome this, there
are two options. One is the proposed array syntax for the three
mentioned functions. The other is to define a new function with a better
API. There is already someone `working on this proposal via
http_cookie_set and
http_cookie_remove <https://externals.io/message/99885>`__.

The author believes strongly that the pros weigh up to the cons. At this
moment more than 50% of the global used browsers support the samesite
flag. And another major browser is already working on it, being Firefox.
How many PHP installations could we make more secure? We should add
samesite to the core of PHP. The only question is: "What is the best
route to take?". Since the additional argument solution comes with the
two downsides mentioned in the two paragraphs above, the author advice
would be to allow an array of options to the setcookie, setrawcookie and
session_set_cookie_params functions.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

There are no backward incompatible changes.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

Next PHP 7.x. Since deadlines have passed for 7.2, this will be 7.3.

RFC Impact
----------

php.ini defaults
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following ini values will be added.

-  session.cookie_samesite

The default value is the empty string in both default development and
production php.ini.

Future Scope
------------

When this RFC will be rejected, it could mean that the current cookie
functions should be left untouched and that PHP needs new functions for
cookies with a better API.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

This RFC requires a 50%+1 majority. If both questions pass, only the one
with most votes will be implemented.

First implementation suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Question: Add samesite argument to setcookie, setrawcookie and session_set_cookie_params functions?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Second implementation suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Question: Allow setcookie, setrawcookie and session_set_cookie_params to accept an array of options as fourth/second parameter, with the possible options being path, domain, secure, httponly and samesite?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-1:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Patches and Tests
-----------------

-  `Github PR #2613 containing the additional argument
   solution <https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/2613>`__
-  Github PR with the array of options solution will be created when
   this RFC gets accepted
-  Implemented via http://git.php.net/?p=php-src.git;a=commit;h=08b9310
   and http://git.php.net/?p=php-src.git;a=commit;h=2b58ab2
-  Documented via
   http://svn.php.net/viewvc?view=revision&revision=345661

References
----------

-  `PHP BUG #72230 Add SameSite Cookies to
   setcookie() <https://bugs.php.net/bug.php?id=72230>`__
-  `Proposal of SameSite cookie as
   standard <https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-west-first-party-cookies-07>`__
-  `CSRF is dead <https://scotthelme.co.uk/csrf-is-dead/>`__
-  `browsers that implement SameSite
   cookie <https://caniuse.com/#search=samesite>`__

Errata
------

The actually implemented alternative signatures of the functions have
been slightly changed from the original RFC. See the documentation in
the PHP manual for details:

-  `setcookie() <http://php.net/manual/en/function.setcookie.php>`__
-  `setrawcookie() <http://php.net/manual/en/function.setrawcookie.php>`__
-  `session_set_cookie_params() <http://php.net/manual/en/function.session-set-cookie-params.php>`__

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Author Of Rfc And Creator Of Pr: Frederik Bosch, f.bosch@genkgo.nl
:Original Authors: , xistence at 0x90 dot nl
:Original Status: Implemented (PHP 7.3 via commit `08b9310 <http://git.php.net/?p=php-src.git;a=commit;h=08b9310>`__ and `2b58ab2 <http://git.php.net/?p=php-src.git;a=commit;h=2b58ab2>`__.)
:Slug: same-site-cookie
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/same-site-cookie
