Operator Functions
==================

:PHP-RFC: 0572
:Title: Operator Functions
:Author: Andrea Faulds <ajf@ajf.me>
:Status: Withdrawn
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2017-09-08
:Version: 1.0.2

Background
----------

Over time, PHP has gradually acquired more facilities that enable
functional programming. A frequent pattern in functional programming is
the use of higher-order functions (functions that take or return
functions, e.g. ``array_map()``). With higher-order functions, small
operations can be composed together to make more complex ones (or even
an entire program). PHP's `standard
library <http://php.net/manual/en/funcref.php>`__ comprises a large set
of operations which can potentially be used with higher-order functions.
However, PHP's most fundamental set of operations, `the
operators <http://php.net/manual/en/language.operators.php>`__, are not
functions and therefore cannot be directly used with higher-order
functions. This means that either wrapper functions for operators must
be written by PHP users, or otherwise-generic code which operates on
functions must have specific code paths for the operators.

Proposal
--------

Basics
~~~~~~

This RFC proposes that, for each of PHP's built-in operators that
operate solely on expressions (no assignment operators), a corresponding
function with the same symbol would be added to the PHP standard library
in the root namespace (``\``). So, for the ``+`` operator there would be
a corresponding ``'+'`` function, for the ``===`` operator a
corresponding ``'==='`` function, and so on.

These functions could then be passed as arguments to higher-order
functions:

.. code:: php

   // Convert numbers from strings to ints or floats as appropriate
   $numbers = array_map('+', $_GET["numbers"]);

.. code:: php

   // Adds the numbers in $terms together (equivalent to array_sum())
   $sum = array_reduce($terms, '+', 0);

.. code:: php

   // Multiplies the numbers in $terms together (equivalent to array_product())
   $product = array_reduce($terms, '*', 1);

.. code:: php

   // Union of the arrays (*NOT* the same as array_merge())
   $merged = array_reduce($arrays, '+', []);

.. code:: php

   class Data
   {
       public $values;
       public function __construct(array $values) {
           $this->values = $values;
       }
       public function sort(callable $function) {
           usort($this->values, $function);
       }
   }

   $data = new Data([1, 22, 3]);

   // Sorts using standard comparison rules
   // (equivalent to sort(), but now doesn't need its own code-path)
   $data->sort('<=>');

   // Sorts using string comparison rules
   $data->sort('strcmp');

This is particularly useful when combined with partial application and
function composition (primitives PHP currently does not yet have
built-in, but can be written manually):

.. code:: php

   // Double all the numbers in the array
   $doubled = array_map(partialApply('*', 2), $terms);

.. code:: php

   // Select only the positive numbers
   $positiveSubset = array_filter($numbers, partialApply('<', 0));

An example working partial application implementation would be:

.. code:: php

   function partialApply(callable $c, ...$args) {
       return function (...$args2) use ($c, $args) {
           return $c(...$args, ...$args2);
       };
   }

Detail
~~~~~~

Because operators have symbols that aren't valid identifiers in PHP
source code (e.g. ``+``), these functions cannot be called directly in
the same manner as a normal function (i.e. ``+(1, 2)``). However, a
function with any name can be called by specifying its name as a string
(e.g. ``'+'(1, 1)`` or ``"+"(1, 1)``). Therefore, you could technically
use these functions in place of operators:

.. code:: php

   // An excessively verbose version of sqrt(($x1 - $x2) ** 2 + ($y1 - $y2) ** 2)
   $distance = sqrt('+'('**'('-'($x1, $x2), 2), '**'('-'($y1, $y2), 2)));

Of course, there is no practical reason to do this. The usefulness of
this proposal is in composing operators with higher-order functions.

The table below lists the new functions that would be added to the root
namespace (``\``). Each is named the same as its corresponding operator,
including any aliases (for the sake of consistency).

================== ======================= ==========================
Function signature Corresponding operation Notes
================== ======================= ==========================
``'+'($a[, $b])``  ``+$a``, ``$a + $b``    
``'-'($a[, $b])``  ``-$a``, ``$a - $b``    
``'*'($a, $b)``    ``$a * $b``             
``'/'($a, $b)``    ``$a / $b``             
``'%'($a, $b)``    ``$a % $b``             
``'**'($a, $b)``   ``$a ** $b``            
``'&'($a, $b)``    ``$a & $b``             
``'|'($a, $b)``    ``$a | $b``             
``'^'($a, $b)``    ``$a ^ $b``             
``'~'($a)``        ``~$a``                 
``'<<'($a, $b)``   ``$a << $b``            
``'>>'($a, $b)``   ``$a >> $b``            
``'=='($a, $b)``   ``$a == $b``            
``'==='($a, $b)``  ``$a === $b``           
``'!='($a, $b)``   ``$a != $b``            
``'<>'($a, $b)``   ``$a <> $b``            
``'!=='($a, $b)``  ``$a !== $b``           
``'<'($a, $b)``    ``$a < $b``             
``'>'($a, $b)``    ``$a > $b``             
``'<='($a, $b)``   ``$a <= $b``            
``'>='($a, $b)``   ``$a >= $b``            
``'<=>'($a, $b)``  ``$a <=> $b``           
``'&&'($a, $b)``   ``$a && $b``            Can't fully short-circuit.
``'and'($a, $b)``  ``$a and $b``           Can't fully short-circuit.
``'||'($a, $b)``   ``$a || $b``            Can't fully short-circuit.
``'or'($a, $b)``   ``$a or $b``            Can't fully short-circuit.
``'xor'($a, $b)``  ``$a xor $b``           
``'!'($a)``        ``!$a``                 
``'.'($a, $b)``    ``$a . $b``             
================== ======================= ==========================

Since ``pow()`` already exists and behaves identically to how ``'**'()``
would, ``'**'()`` is simply an alias of it.

These functions do not perform any extra type checking on their
arguments beyond that normally performed by the operators they
correspond to.

Missing operators
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The table above (like the patch) currently contains all the operators in
the `Operators section of the PHP
Manual <http://php.net/manual/en/language.operators.php>`__, minus
``instanceof``, :literal:`\`backticks\`` and the assignment operators.
Whether these should have functions too is a matter to debate;
``instanceof`` doesn't take arbitrary expressions and already has a
functional counterpart (``is_a``). As for the assignment operators,
references mean they could be done, but from a functional programming
perspective they have limited utility.

PHP also has some other constructs that could be classed as operators
but aren't considered such by the manual. A (possibly non-exhaustive)
list is:

-  ``??`` (Can't ``isset()``. Can't short-circuit.)
-  ``?:`` (Could be ``'?:'($a, $b[, $c])`` and map to ``$a ?: $b`` or
   ``$a ? $b : $c`` depending on parameter count. Can't short-circuit.)
-  ``@`` (Could not be made a function without changing it to act on a
   callable.)
-  ``(int)``, ``(string)`` etc. (Note ``intval()`` etc already exist.)
-  ``clone``
-  ``print`` (This always returns 1, so we might as well make ``echo`` a
   function too even though it's a statement.)
-  ``->`` (How do you distinguish between property lookup and method
   calls? Are identifiers replaced with strings?)
-  ``[]`` (Array indexing.)
-  ``()`` (Function invocation. ``call_user_func`` exists already.)
-  ``eval`` (Probably not a good rabbit hole to go down, this requires
   frowned-upon stack gymnastics due to affecting the current scope.)
-  ``include``, ``require``, ``include_once``, ``require_once``
-  ``yield`` (Like ``eval``, would require dubious stack gymnastics. It
   is a control-flow expression, not merely manipulating values.)

Of these, ``->``, ``()``, ``@`` and ``eval`` are the most dubious.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

All of these operator functions create no backwards-compatibility break,
since they have names that cannot be used for userland functions, and
thus they cannot conflict with function names in existing code
(hypothetically this may not be true if using exotic extensions like
runkit).

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

This would go in the next PHP 7.x, most likely 7.3.

RFC Impact
----------

To Existing Extensions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Because ``'**'()`` aliases it, ``pow()`` is moved out of
``ext/standard`` and into ``Zend``. This is merely an organisational
change and has no user impact.

To Opcache
~~~~~~~~~~

The patch passes its test under OPcache.

Open Issues
-----------

See “Missing operators” section.

Unaffected PHP Functionality
----------------------------

The existing operators themselves behave the same as ever.

Being able to quote function names in function calls (e.g.
``'+'(1, 1)``) is not a new idea introduced by this RFC, it has been
possible since `Uniform Variable
Syntax </rfc/uniform_variable_syntax>`__ in PHP 7.0.

Future Scope
------------

Operator functions would fit well with built-in partial application and
function composition. These could be added as functions, methods on
``\Closure``, or both.

If built-in operators can have corresponding functions, then user
functions could have corresponding operators in future, i.e.
user-defined operators. This is possible in Haskell, for example, where
new operators can be defined as functions.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

This is technically a standard library addition, so may only require a
50%+1 majority. It would be a straight Yes/No vote on whether to accept
the RFC and merge the patch for PHP 7.3.

Patches and Tests
-----------------

A complete patch for php-src, including test, can be found here:
https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/2738

There may be some merit to adding this to the language specification,
even though it otherwise doesn't cover built-in functions. There is no
patch for this at present.

Implementation
--------------

After the project is implemented, this section should contain

#. the version(s) it was merged to
#. a link to the git commit(s)
#. a link to the PHP manual entry for the feature
#. a link to the language specification section (if any)

References
----------

-  PHP manual operators section:
   http://php.net/manual/en/language.operators.php
-  Haskell's infix functions (any normal operator is a function and
   vice-versa) were an inspiration.

Rejected Features
-----------------

Keep this updated with features that were discussed on the mail lists.

Changelog
---------

-  v1.0.2 - add subsection discussing omissions
-  v1.0.1 - acknowledge why certain operators are excluded
-  v1.0 - first public non-draft version

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Andrea Faulds, ajf@ajf.me
:Original Status: Under Discussion
:Slug: operator_functions
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/operator_functions
