JSON_THROW_ON_ERROR
===================

:PHP-RFC: 0574
:Title: JSON_THROW_ON_ERROR
:Author: Andrea Faulds
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2017-09-10
:PHP-Version: 7.3
:Version: 1.0.2

Introduction
------------

PHP has two functions for dealing with JSON, ``json_decode()`` and
``json_encode()``. Unfortunately, both have suboptimal error handling.
``json_decode()`` returns ``null`` upon erroring, but ``null`` is also a
possible valid result (if decoding the JSON ``"null"``). It is only
possible to know if an error occurred by calling ``json_last_error()``
or ``json_last_error_msg()``, which return the global error state in
machine-readable and human-readable forms respectively.
``json_encode()`` also uses this system, but at least does have a clear
error return value. But both functions also do not halt program
execution by default on error, or even throw a warning.

This situation is suboptimal, and throwing exceptions would be cleaner:
there would be no confusion between error values and correct results, no
(possibly outdated) global state, no program execution after the error
is thrown unless explicitly handled, and error messages would be neatly
traceable to their source. However, to immediately change the default
behaviour of these functions to throw would be a significant
backwards-compatibility issue, and producing a notice or warning is not
ideal for predictable, routine errors that are not bugs or poor code
style (as JSON decoding may be when given user input, for instance).

Proposal
--------

This RFC instead proposes adding a new option flag value for
``json_decode()`` and ``json_encode()``, ``JSON_THROW_ON_ERROR``. When
passed this flag, the error behaviour of these functions is changed. The
global error state is left untouched, and if an error occurs that would
otherwise set it, these functions instead throw a ``JsonException`` with
the message and code set to whatever ``json_last_error()`` and
``json_last_error_msg()`` would otherwise be respectively.
``JSON_PARTIAL_OUTPUT_ON_ERROR`` would override and disable
``JSON_THROW_ON_ERROR``, so that generic wrapper functions that always
pass the ``JSON_PARTIAL_OUTPUT_ON_ERROR`` flag continue to support
``JSON_PARTIAL_OUTPUT_ON_ERROR``.

``JsonException`` would be a new class that subclasses ``Exception``.

Note that when given an invalid depth parameter, ``json_decode()``
outputs a warning and returns NULL. This behaviour is unaffected by
``JSON_THROW_ON_ERROR`` because it does not affect the global error
state at present, has no corresponding error code to throw an exception
with, and is not dependent on user input. Similarly, parameter parsing
errors continue to produce warnings (when not in strict mode) because
their error behaviour cannot be conditioned on the value of a parameter
being parsed. Both can be caught by a user error handler that converts
errors to exceptions.

At the present time, there would be no change to the default error
behaviour. It would be worthwhile considering whether to eventually
slowly deprecate not using ``JSON_THROW_ON_ERROR`` and then change the
default behaviour, but this RFC does not do this.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

There is a small possibility of naming conflicts with existing userland
code for ``JsonException`` and ``JSON_THROW_ON_ERROR``. Since they are
in the root namespace (``\``) and follow the pattern of existing
JSON-related items, it could have been reasonably anticipated by users
that such names could conflict. It would also be trivial to rename such
items. Therefore, it is reasonable not to be concerned about this
potential incompatibility.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

The next possible version, most likely 7.3, though as this is a small
self-contained feature, it is theoretically possible it could be
introduced to 7.2.x.

RFC Impact
----------

To Existing Extensions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The JSON extension is what this RFC concerns.

To Opcache
~~~~~~~~~~

It shouldn't have any impact on OPcache. In any case, my patch doesn't
seem to have caused any problems with OPcache.

Open Issues
-----------

None.

Unaffected PHP Functionality
----------------------------

JSON's default error behaviour.

Future Scope
------------

As mentioned earlier, it may be desirable to deprecate the default
behaviour eventually.

Vote
----

This is not a language change, merely a small addition to the JSON
extension, so it only technically requires a 50%+1 majority. However,
it's a 2/3 vote. It is a simple Yes/No vote on whether to accept this
RFC and merge the patch.

Voting started 2017-09-25 and ended 2017-10-05.

Question: Accept and merge JSON_THROW_ON_ERROR for PHP 7.3?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Patches and Tests
-----------------

The patch, including tests, can be found here:
https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/2662

Implementation
--------------

Merged in PHP 7.3:
https://github.com/php/php-src/commit/e823770515bd0530bd3c09ea273c720b4df33734

After the project is implemented, this section should contain

#. a link to the PHP manual entry for the feature

References
----------

This patch and RFC were prompted by two discussions on the php internals
mailing list started by Craig Duncan concerning JSON error handling:

-  http://news.php.net/php.internals/100061
-  http://news.php.net/php.internals/100071

Rejected Features
-----------------

Keep this updated with features that were discussed on the mail lists.

Changelog
---------

-  v1.0.2 - change behaviour to leave global error flag untouched,
   rather than clearing it; note depth, param-parsing errors
-  v1.0.1 - cover details of the patch not previously mentioned
-  v1.0 - initial version

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Andrea Faulds
:Original Status: Implemented (PHP 7.3)
:Slug: json_throw_on_error
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/json_throw_on_error
