Allow A Trailing Comma In Function Calls
========================================

:PHP-RFC: 0583
:Title: Allow A Trailing Comma In Function Calls
:Author: Sammy Kaye Powers <me@sammyk.me>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2017-10-07
:PHP-Version: 7.3
:Version: 0.1

Introduction
------------

Allowing a trailing comma in function calls will make it more convenient
to append arguments in many contexts where it is common to call a
function with lots of arguments; especially variadic functions.

Proposal
--------

A trailing comma has been allowed in array syntax since forever-ever,
and in grouped namespace syntax since PHP 7.2.

.. code:: php

   # Currently possible
   use Foo\Bar\{
       Foo,
       Bar,
   };

   $foo = [
       'foo',
       'bar',
   ];

Allowing a trailing comma makes sense in these contexts as new values
get appended frequently. There is another context wherein appending more
values frequently happens: calling a variadic function.

.. code:: php

   unset(
       $foo,
       $bar,
       $baz,
   );

Frequent Context Examples
-------------------------

A trailing comma in function calls make it crazy convient to invoke any
function that takes variable arguments (i.e. using the splat operator
``...`` or ``func_get_args()``.)

Unsetting variables
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is extremely common to send a list of two or more arguments to
``unset()`` to unset variables.

.. code:: php

   unset(
       $somethingIDontNeedAnymore,
       $anotherOneToKill,
       $letsMakeThisEasy,
   );

Sending variables to a template engine
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Another extremely common practice is to send a list of variables to a
template engine concisely using ``compact()``.

.. code:: php

   echo $twig->render(
       'index.html',
       compact(
           'title',
           'body',
           'comments',
       )
   );

Merging arrays
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Invoking ``array_merge()`` is another great example of how a trailing
comma makes values easier to append.

.. code:: php

   $newArray = array_merge(
       $arrayOne,
       $arrayTwo,
       ['foo', 'bar'],
   );

Debugging all the things
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When you're quickly debugging with ``var_dump()``, it's nice to not have
to worry about removing that dangling comma in order for your script to
run.

.. code:: php

   var_dump(
       $whatIsInThere,
       $probablyABugInThisOne,
       $oneMoreToCheck,
   );

i18n & l10n
~~~~~~~~~~~

Internationalization & localization often makes use of variadic
functions such as ``sprintf()`` that usually expand and contract over
time.

.. code:: php

   $en = 'A trailing %s makes %s a happy developer.';
   $text = sprintf(
       $en,
       'comma',
       'Jane',
   );

And so on...
~~~~~~~~~~~~

This list of examples is not meant to be exhaustive, but you can see how
allowing a trailing comma in function calls fits well within the
existing trailing comma contexts (arrays & grouped namespaces).

Method & closure calls too
--------------------------

Method calls also adopt trailing comma functionality.

.. code:: php

   class Foo
   {
     public function __construct(...$args) {
       //
     }
     
     public function bar(...$args) {
       //
     }
     
     public function __invoke(...$args) {
       //
     }
   }

   $foo = new Foo(
     'constructor',
     'bar',
   );

   $foo->bar(
     'method',
     'bar',
   );

   $foo(
     'invoke',
     'bar',
   );

And closures too.

.. code:: php

   $bar = function(...$args) {
     //
   };

   $bar(
     'closure',
     'bar',
   );

"Not really a function" functions as well
-----------------------------------------

There are two language constructs that look like functions but aren't
that will also allow a trailing comma: ``unset()`` (as mentioned before)
and ``isset()``.

.. code:: php

   unset($foo, $bar,);
   var_dump(isset($foo, $bar,));

Wait, didn't we just vote on this?
----------------------------------

Yes, there was an RFC to `add trailing commas to all list syntax in PHP
7.2 <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/list-syntax-trailing-commas>`__.
Unfortunately due to an oversight on my end, the vote for function calls
and function declarations was combined into one vote so the vote failed
(but just barely!)

I was contacted by many "no" voters saying that they would have voted
"yes" for function calls, but "no" for function declarations. This RFC
proposes allowing a trailing comma in function call syntax only.

We are allowed to put this feature up for vote again since the mandatory
6-month waiting period has passed since the last vote and this RFC
targets a new major version of PHP.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

None

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

PHP 7.3

What's not allowed
------------------

Function declaration syntax will not change. This RFC targets function
call syntax only.

.. code:: php

   # Parse error
   function bar($a, $b,) {
       //
   }

Free-standing commas are not allowed.

.. code:: php

   # Parse error
   foo(,);

Multiple trailing commas & leading commas are not allowed.

.. code:: php

   # Parse error
   foo('function', 'bar',,);
   # Also parse error
   foo(, 'function', 'bar');

Other things that could look like functions like ``yield`` & ``list()``
will go untouched and no other list syntax will be affected.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

Requires a 2/3 majority to pass. Voting begins **2017-10-21 18:30 UTC**
and ends **2017-11-04 18:30 UTC**.

Question: Allow a trailing comma in function calls
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Patches and Tests
-----------------

This patch, sans the tests, is a trivial three-line change in the
parser.

`See the diff on
GitHub <https://github.com/SammyK/php-src/compare/master...rfc-trailing-comma-function-calls>`__

The trailing comma is thrown out at the parser level so there's no
runtime computations wasted.

Implementation
--------------

Implemented in PHP 7.3 via
https://github.com/php/php-src/commit/b591c329ee3129adbdc35141bb1542d119f7a2a1.

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:First Published At: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/list-syntax-trailing-commas (2017-01-27) & https://wiki.php.net/rfc/trailing-comma-function-args (2013-02-19)
:Original Authors: Sammy Kaye Powers, me@sammyk.me
:Original Status: Implemented (in PHP 7.3)
:Slug: trailing-comma-function-calls
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/trailing-comma-function-calls
