Unbundle Ext/wddx
=================

:PHP-RFC: 0590
:Title: Unbundle Ext/wddx
:Author: Christoph M. Becker <cmb@php.net>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2018-01-17
:PHP-Version: 7.4
:Version: 1.1.1

Introduction
------------

WDDX has been designed as programming language independent data exchange
format for the web [1]_. However, it never has been formally
standardized, and it appears that it has been mostly superseeded by
other data exchange formats such as JSON.

A particular problem is that PHP 4.0.0 added the ability to
(de)serialize class instances [2]_ including calls to ``_​_sleep()`` and
``__wakeup()``, respectively. Therefore, ``wddx_deserialize()`` must not
be called on untrusted user input to avoid remote code execution,
basically defeating the purpose of WDDX. A former RFC proposed to
“\ `Deprecate class instance deserialization in
WDDX <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/wddx-deprecate-class-instance-deserialization>`__\ ”,
but it has been withdrawn since that would break BC, and there seemed to
be generally more consensus on deprecating the extension altogether.

Proposal
--------

Therefore I suggest to unbundle ext/wddx. A secondary vote will be held
about the detailed procedure:

#. deprecate all functionality of the extension for PHP 7.4; move to
   PECL for PHP 8
#. deprecate all functionality of the extension \*and\* move to PECL for
   PHP 7.4
#. move the extension to PECL for PHP 7.4
#. dump the extension for PHP 7.4 (unbundle without moving to PECL or
   somewhere else)

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

Obviously, code using the wddx extension would issue deprecation
warnings, and/or would have to use the wddx extension from PECL (or
somewhere else), or be rewritten.

Open Issues
-----------

-  None

Voting
------

The primary vote is about whether to unbundle ext/wddx, which requires a
2/3 majority.

Question: Unbundle ext/wddx
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

| 
| A secondary vote is held about the detailed procedure (see the
  `proposal <#proposal>`__ above). If the primary vote passes, the
  alternative with the most votes will be accepted.

Question: Unbundle ext/wddx details
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-1:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  depr. 7.4/move 8.0(1)
-  depr. and move 7.4(2)
-  move 7.4(3)
-  dump 7.4(4)

| 
| Voting starts on 2019-01-17, and ends on 2019-01-31.

Patches and Tests
-----------------

None, yet.

Implementation
--------------

#. `Applied <http://git.php.net/?p=php-src.git;a=commit;h=6bbb18a0b6bef11222caaa55c00abdbcbb55d54b>`__
   to PHP-7.4
#. `Documentation <http://svn.php.net/viewvc?view=revision&revision=347028>`__

References
----------

-  Former discussion regarding `WDDX serialization and
   security <https://externals.io/message/100183>`__
-  Discussion of the `former
   RFC <https://externals.io/message/100220>`__

Rejected Features
-----------------

None.

.. [1]
   http://xml.coverpages.org/wddx0090-dtd-19980928.txt

.. [2]
   http://git.php.net/?p=php-src.git;a=commit;h=33eb7d83cab733a3397168d35506e750e1e30d65

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Christoph M. Becker, cmb@php.net
:Slug: deprecate-and-remove-ext-wddx
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/deprecate-and-remove-ext-wddx
