Weak References
===============

:PHP-RFC: 0598
:Title: Weak References
:Author: krakjoe
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2018-05-17
:PHP-Version: 7.4
:Version: 0.1

Introduction
------------

Weak References allow the programmer to retain a reference to an object
which does not prevent the object from being destroyed; They are useful
for implementing cache like structures. They are currently supported in
PHP by extension.

The current implementations of WeakRef all work by overloading object
handlers, the most popular implementation
(`pecl-weakref <https://github.com/colder/php-weakref>`__) changes stack
allocated read only memory and will be rendered unusable by PHP 7.3.
Other implementations that change object handlers in some other way also
risk faulting and rely on undefined behaviour and casting away
constness.

Other implementations are possible,
`krakjoe/uref <https://github.com/krakjoe/uref>`__ is an implementation
that uses low level features (mprotect, 0xCC, signals) to implement
weakrefs, but at the cost of portability, generating segfaults,
protecting memory, and implicit signal handler restrictions.

In principle weak referencing an object is not complicated, and only
requires the (ab)use of Zend or layers beneath because we do not
directly support it.

Proposal
--------

We directly support weak referencing in the simplest possible way.

API
---

The proposed API:

.. code:: php

   final class WeakReference {
       public static function create(object $object) : WeakReference;
       
       public function get() : ?object;
   }

The proposed API differs from the documented
`WeakRef <http://docs.php.net/class.weakref>`__ class. The currently
documented API includes the following methods omitted from the proposed
API:

-  valid
-  acquire
-  release

Acquire and release are sugar for get and unset, and valid is simply
superfluous since the get method will not throw an exception and null is
a falsy value.

Implementation Details
----------------------

The proposed API:

-  is closed
-  does not support serialization
-  does not support properties

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

None

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

PHP 7.4

RFC Impact
----------

To SAPIs
~~~~~~~~

None

To Existing Extensions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

None

To Opcache
~~~~~~~~~~

None

New Constants
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

None

php.ini Defaults
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

None

Open Issues
-----------

None

Unaffected PHP Functionality
----------------------------

All

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

Simple Yes/No, requires super majority.

Question: Implement weakrefs ?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Voting started 2019-02-22, ends 2019-03-08.

Patches and Tests
-----------------

https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/3787

References
----------

Announce: https://externals.io/message/102111

Re-announce: https://externals.io/message/104014

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: krakjoe
:Slug: weakrefs
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/weakrefs
