Make Compact Function Reports Undefined Passed Variables
========================================================

:PHP-RFC: 0599
:Title: Make Compact Function Reports Undefined Passed Variables
:Author: Gabriel Caruso <carusogabriel34@gmail.com>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2018-05-24
:PHP-Version: 7.3
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

Recently, during a Coding Standards discussion, someone came up with the
idea of forbidden the *compact()* function. One of the arguments was
that this function does not report undefined variables passed to it.
After checking its implementation and documentation, nothing was founded
justifying the reason of why this has been this way since ever.

Proposal
--------

This RFC proposes the addition of a notice in the *compact()* function
when a not defined variable had been passed to it.

.. code:: php

   $foo = 'bar';

   $baz = compact('foz'); // Notice: compact(): Undefined variable: foz

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

Undefined variables passed to *compact()* will now be reported as a
notice.

Proposed PHP Version
--------------------

The next PHP 7.x, current version 7.3.

RFC Impact
----------

This RFC has only impact in the *compact()* function.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

Since this RFC contains a Backward Incompatible Change, 2/3 majority is
required.

Question: Make compact function reports undefined passed variables
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Voting starts on 2018-06-06 and ends on 2018-06-18 23:00 UTC.

Proposal and Patch
------------------

The patch (including tests) for this proposal is available in `GitHub
Pull Request #3240 <https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/3240>`__.

References
----------

https://externals.io/message/102012

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Gabriel Caruso (carusogabriel34@gmail.com)
:Original Status: Implemented (PHP 7.3)
:Slug: compact
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/compact
