Deprecate And Remove Image2wbmp()
=================================

:PHP-RFC: 0600
:Title: Deprecate And Remove Image2wbmp()
:Author: Christoph M. Becker <cmb@php.net>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2018-05-26
:PHP-Version: 7.3
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

ext/gd has two functions to output WBMP  [1]_ images: ``imagewbmp()``
and ``image2wbmp()``. Both are supposed to handle the necessary
monochrome conversion by different means. While the former function
allows the desired foreground color to be specified, the latter function
is supposed to take a brightness threshold parameter. However, as of PHP
5.0.0 the threshold parameter of ``image2wbmp()`` is treated as
foreground color, so both functions are basically identical.

This pointless duplication of functionality could be resolved by fixing
``image2wbmp()`` according to the documentation (i.e. treat the third
parameter actually as brightness treshold), but

-  fixing **this** 10+y old bug is likely to cause more harm than good
-  a monochrome conversion should be a **general** feature of GD (or
   rather libgd), since it may be useful for other image formats as well
   (e.g. PNG)
-  the `implemented monochrome
   conversion <https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/PHP-7.2.4/ext/gd/gd.c#L4140>`__
   is very simplistic, and does not fit to
   `gdImageGrayScale() <http://libgd.github.io/manuals/2.2.5/files/gd_filter-c.html#gdImageGrayScale>`__'s
   `algorithm <https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/PHP-7.2.4/ext/gd/libgd/gd_filter.c#L74>`__
-  WBMP might be considered obsolete nowadays

Proposal
--------

Therefore, this RFC proposes to:

#. fix the
   `documentation <http://de2.php.net/manual/en/function.image2wbmp.php>`__
   according to the current implementation
#. remove superfluous code (most notably
   `\_php_image_bw_convert() <https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/PHP-7.2.4/ext/gd/gd.c#L4103>`__)
#. deprecate ``image2wbmp()``
#. finally remove ``image2wbmp()`` altogether

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

After the deprecation, each call to ``image2wbmp()`` would issue a
deprecated warning. After the removal, each call to ``image2wbmp()``
would raise a fatal error.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

Item (1) to (3) of the proposal should target next PHP 7.y (i.e. PHP
7.3), while item (4) (i.e. the actual removal) should target next PHP x
(supposedly PHP 8).

Voting
------

A single vote will be held to decide whether to implement the
`proposal <#proposal>`__. This vote will require a 2/3 supermajority.
Voting started on 2018-05-26, and ended on 2018-06-09 21:00 UTC.

Question: Deprecate and Remove image2wbmp()
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Patches and Tests
-----------------

A `pull request regarding the
deprecation <https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/3247>`__ is available.

Implementation
--------------

#. Implemented in PHP 7.3 via
   http://git.php.net/?p=php-src.git;a=commit;h=3cbf594dfd0708dc36f1655c50e16fa963e61501
#. `doc <http://php.net/manual/en/function.image2wbmp.php>`__
   `fix <http://svn.php.net/viewvc?view=revision&revision=345112>`__
#. `Removed for PHP
   8 <http://git.php.net/?p=php-src.git;a=commit;h=dfa6c2046a8d7b66c4be52e46888f0fefccbcfd4>`__

References
----------

-  relevant `bug report <https://bugs.php.net/73317>`__
-  preliminary `discussion on
   internals <https://externals.io/message/102025>`__
-  `RFC discussion <https://externals.io/message/102106>`__

.. [1]
   Wireless Application Protocol Bitmap Format; not Windows Bitmap

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Christoph M. Becker, cmb@php.net
:Original Status: Implemented (PHP 7.3)
:Slug: image2wbmp
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/image2wbmp
