Improve Openssl_random_pseudo_bytes()
=====================================

:PHP-RFC: 0617
:Title: Improve Openssl_random_pseudo_bytes()
:Author: Sammy Kaye Powers <sammyk@php.net>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2018-10-19
:PHP-Version: 7.4
:Version: 0.1

Introduction
------------

The ``openssl_random_pseudo_bytes()`` function is a wrapper for
OpenSSL's `RAND_bytes
CSPRNG <https://www.openssl.org/docs/man1.0.2/crypto/RAND_bytes.html>`__.
CSPRNG implementations should always fail closed, but
``openssl_random_pseudo_bytes()`` fails open pushing critical fail
checks into userland. It also has an unnecessary second parameter that
confuses the usage of the API.

The Fail-Open Problem
---------------------

The ``openssl_random_pseudo_bytes()`` function fails open which means
code like this:

.. code:: php

   function genCsrfToken(): string
   {
       return bin2hex(openssl_random_pseudo_bytes(32));
   }

...could return an empty string. This forces the developer to do their
own checks and fail closed in userland.

.. code:: php

   function genCsrfToken(): string
   {
       $bytes = openssl_random_pseudo_bytes(32);
       if (false === $bytes) {
           throw new \Exception('CSPRNG error');
       }
       return bin2hex($bytes);
   }

A `quick search in
GitHub <https://github.com/search?l=PHP&q=openssl_random_pseudo_bytes&type=Code>`__
reveals very little checking of the return value of
``openssl_random_pseudo_bytes()`` in the wild.

CSPRNG implementations should always fail closed.

The Confusing API Problem
-------------------------

There is also a confusing pass-by-reference param ``$crypto_strong``.
According to `the
docs <http://php.net/manual/en/function.openssl-random-pseudo-bytes.php>`__:

    It also indicates if a cryptographically strong algorithm was used
    to produce the pseudo-random bytes, and does this via the optional
    crypto_strong parameter.

This forces yet another check in userland to determine if the bytes are
strong enough for crypto. The usage of this parameter is unnecessary
since ``openssl_random_pseudo_bytes()`` already returns false on failure
and the implementation doesn't allow returning a string of bytes while
also setting ``$crypto_strong`` to false.

The API is unnecessarily confusing making it easy to get it wrong. The
above userland example isn't even correct according to the docs. The
correct usage in userland would actually be:

.. code:: php

   function genCsrfToken(): string
   {
       $strong = false;
       $bytes = openssl_random_pseudo_bytes(32, $strong);
       if (false === $bytes || false === $strong) {
           throw new \Exception('CSPRNG error');
       }
       return bin2hex($bytes);
   }

This redundant check is confusing for developers and the documentation
does not properly describe the behavior of the implementation.

Proposal
--------

To fix the fail-open problem, we simply throw an ``\Exception`` (just
like ```random_bytes()``
does <https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/8d3f8ca12a0b00f2a74a27424790222536235502/ext/standard/random.c#L179>`__).
This is the Correct Behavior™️ for any CSPRNG implementation.

To fix the the confusing-api problem, we should deprecate the usage of
the second ``$crypto_strong`` parameter and just make it always set the
value to true. In PHP 8.0 we'd completely remove the second parameter
and upgrade the function's ZPP to ``ZEND_PARSE_PARAMS_THROW`` causing
the following fatal error when attempting to send in the second
argument.

    PHP Fatal error: Uncaught ArgumentCountError:
    openssl_random_pseudo_bytes() expects exactly 1 parameter, 2 given

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

False-checks on the return value of ``openssl_random_pseudo_bytes()``
will do nothing since the function fails closed. Usage of
``$crypto_strong`` will generate errors.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

PHP 7.4

RFC Impact
----------

Unaffected PHP Functionality
----------------------------

The ``openssl_random_pseudo_bytes()`` function will continue to use
OpenSSL's ``RAND_bytes`` CSPRNG.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

Requires a 2/3 majority

Voting started **2018-11-02 @ 19:30 UTC** and will close sometime around
**2018-11-16 @ 19:30 UTC**

Vote #1: Make openssl_random_pseudo_bytes() fail closed
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: Make openssl_random_pseudo_bytes() fail closed
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Vote #2: Deprecate the usage of the $crypto_strong parameter
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: Deprecate the usage of the $crypto_strong parameter
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-1:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Patches and Tests
-----------------

#. `The patch &
   tests <https://github.com/php/php-src/compare/master...SammyK:rfc-improve-openssl-random-pseudo-bytes>`__

Implementation
--------------

After the project is implemented, this section should contain

#. the version(s) it was merged into
#. a link to the git commit(s)
#. a link to the PHP manual entry for the feature
#. a link to the language specification section (if any)

References
----------

#. `Initial discussion <https://externals.io/message/103331>`__
#. `Under-discussion
   announcement <https://externals.io/message/103345>`__

Rejected Features
-----------------

#. The original ping to @internals suggested aliasing
   ``openssl_random_pseudo_bytes()`` to ``random_bytes()``, but this was
   not received well so that idea got put in the bin.

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/3649
:Original Authors: Sammy Kaye Powers sammyk@php.net
:Original Status: Implemented (in PHP 7.4)
:Slug: improve-openssl-random-pseudo-bytes
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/improve-openssl-random-pseudo-bytes
