Mb_str_split
============

:PHP-RFC: 0620
:Title: Mb_str_split
:Author: rumi <legale.legale@gmail.com>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2019-01-02
:PHP-Version: 7.4
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

mb_str_split is a function to perform string splitting to an array of
defined size chunks.

Description
~~~~~~~~~~~

``array mb_str_split (string $string [, integer $split_length = 1, string $encoding = mb_internal_encoding() ])``

The function works through the libmbfl library and supports all libmbfl
supported charsets just like other mbstring functions.

Usage example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: php

   <?php 
   print_r(mb_str_split("победа", 2));

   --EXPECT--

   Array
   (
       [0] => по
       [1] => бе
       [2] => да
   )

Proposal
--------

Include function into the existent mbstring extension.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

next PHP-7.x

RFC Impact
----------

To Existing Extensions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

mbstring

To Opcache
~~~~~~~~~~

Opcache is not affected.

New Constants
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

No.

Open Issues
-----------

No.

Future Scope
------------

No.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

This project requires 50%+1 majority. The voting period: from 2019-01-10
to 2019-01-20.

Question: Include mb_str_split into next PHP-7.x?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Patches and Tests
-----------------

https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/3715
https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/3808

Implementation
--------------

#. Was merged into master (PHP-7.4)
#. https://github.com/php/php-src/commit/d77ad27415a34e4f5908cb262567b7b6f0eca17f

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: rumi, legale.legale@gmail.com
:Original Status: Implemented (in PHP 7.4)
:Pr: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/3715, https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/3808
:Slug: mb_str_split
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/mb_str_split
