Array_reindex Function
======================

:PHP-RFC: 0635
:Title: Array_reindex Function
:Author: Andrey Gromov <andrewgrom@rambler.ru>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2019-03-07
:Version: 0.1

Introduction
------------

It is not rare case when we need only values from some array. Usually we
use constructs like: ``$array = array_values($array);`` In fact I see
many code like ``$new_array = array_values($array);`` without any usage
of $array after this line.

Also, common case is skip null or empty values from this resulting
array, then we use ``if(empty($value)) continue;`` inside loop.

In those cases array_values create redundant structures, and ifs slow
down execution and raise complexity of code.

Proposal
--------

I propose to add new "array_reindex" function into standard library.
This function will receive array by reference, optionally remove useless
values and make in-place conversion to packed array.

::

   array_reindex ( array &$array [, int $flags = ARRAY_REINDEX_NO_SKIP ] ) : bool

Where $flags is bitmask of filtering constants.

If array is kept unchanged then returns FALSE, otherwise returns TRUE.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

Only if the same function declared inside user code.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

Next PHP 7.x or PHP 8.

New Constants
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

   ARRAY_REINDEX_NO_SKIP = 1<<0; // Keep all values
   ARRAY_REINDEX_SKIP_NULL = 1<<1; // Skip NULL values
   const ARRAY_REINDEX_SKIP_EMPTY = 1<<2; //Skip empty(false) values

In current realisation it is possible to use all constant simultaneously
and only most greedly will be used.

Future Scope
------------

Maybe extend filtering scope.

Patches and Tests
-----------------

I will write tests after(if) I receive green light. :)

Implementation
--------------

Review is needed. I not sure if my code does not have any problems.
https://github.com/php/php-src/compare/master...rjhdby:array_reindex

References
----------

Rejected Features
-----------------

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Andrey Gromov, andrewgrom@rambler.ru
:Slug: array_reindex
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/array_reindex
