Deprecate PHP Short Open Tags
=============================

:PHP-RFC: 0641
:Title: Deprecate PHP Short Open Tags
:Author: George Peter Banyard <girgias@php.net>
:Status: Superseded
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2019-03-20
:PHP-Version: 7.4
:Version: 0.1

Introduction
------------

PHP has provided over the years different ways to indicate the beginning
of PHP code other than the standard ``<?php ... ?>`` open tags. Most of
these opening tags have been removed with PHP 7.0.0 [1]_, however, PHP's
short open tags still remain.

Proposal
--------

Deprecate and disable ``short_open_tag`` in PHP 7.4 and remove PHP's
short open tags in PHP 8.0.

Reasoning
---------

-  The PHP
   `documentation <https://php.net/manual/en/language.basic-syntax.phptags.php>`__
   discourages their usage.
-  PHP's short open tags clash with XML ``<?xml ?>`` and can mean two
   different things depending on the INI configuration.
-  PHP's short open tags depend on an INI directive and as such are
   non-portable.
-  As such source code may leak if PHP relying on the short open tags is
   executed on a configuration where this isn't enabled.
-  PHP's parser simplification.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

| Every script which currently uses the discouraged short ``<?`` open
  tag will need to convert to the standard ``<?php`` open tag.
| This can be automatically achieved by using the ``"full_opening_tag"``
  fixer from `PHP-CS-Fixer <https://cs.symfony.com/>`__.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

Deprecation notice and default value changed to Off in PHP 7.4 and
removal in PHP 8.0.

RFC Impact
----------

To SAPIs
~~~~~~~~

None.

To Existing Extensions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Readline and Tokenizer have been updated in the implementations patches.

To Opcache
~~~~~~~~~~

None to my understanding.

php.ini Defaults
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Change ``short_open_tag`` from ``"1"`` to ``"0"``.

Unaffected PHP Functionality
----------------------------

The ``<?=`` short tag is unaffected because as of PHP 5.4 it is always
available.

Feedback
--------

Facebook poll  [2]_ created by Peter Kokot: 73 for, 2 against.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

Yes/No for boths votes.

Vote
----

| Primary vote: Deprecate PHP's short open tags in PHP 7.4.
| Requires a 2/3 majority.

| Secondary vote: Remove PHP's short open tags in PHP 8.0.
| Requires a 2/3 majority.

Voting started on 2019-04-10 at 10:40 UTC and ran until 2019-04-24 11:20
UTC (for two (2) weeks)

Question: Deprecate PHP short open tags in PHP 7.4?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Question: Remove PHP short open tags in PHP 8.0?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-1:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Patches and Tests
-----------------

| https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/3972 PHP 7.4 Deprecation Notice
  Implementation
| https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/3975 PHP 8.0 Removal
  Implementation
| TBD Documentation patch

Implementation
--------------

After the project is implemented, this section should contain

#. the version(s) it was merged into
#. a link to the git commit(s)
#. a link to the PHP manual entry for the feature
#. a link to the language specification section (if any)

References
----------

| `Initial feedback on Internals (link to
  External.io) <https://externals.io/message/104662>`__
| `RFC Announcement on Internals (link to
  External.io) <https://externals.io/message/104922>`__
| `RFC Vote Announcement on Internals (link to
  External.io) <https://externals.io/message/105201>`__

.. [1]
   Remove alternative PHP tags RFC
   https://wiki.php.net/rfc/remove_alternative_php_tags

.. [2]
   https://fb.com/groups/2204685680/permalink/10157687999015681/

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/3972
:Original Authors: George Peter Banyard, girgias@php.net
:Original PHP Version: PHP 7.4
:Original Status: Accepted on 2019-04-24, rendered obsolete by `PHP RFC: Deprecate short open tags, again <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/deprecate_php_short_tags_v2>`__ on 2019-07-23
:Slug: deprecate_php_short_tags
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/deprecate_php_short_tags
