Numeric Literal Separator
=========================

:PHP-RFC: 0654
:Title: Numeric Literal Separator
:Author: Theodore Brown <theodorejb@outlook.com>, Bishop Bettini <bishop@php.net>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2019-05-15
:PHP-Version: 7.4
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

The human eye is not optimized for quickly parsing long sequences of
digits. Thus, a lack of visual separators makes it take longer to read
and debug code, and can lead to unintended mistakes.

.. code:: php

   1000000000;   // Is this a billion? 100 million? 10 billion?
   ‪107925284.88;‬ // What scale or power of 10 is this?

Additionally, without a visual separator numeric literals fail to convey
any additional information, such as whether a financial quantity is
stored in cents:

.. code:: php

   $discount = 13500; // Is this 13,500? Or 135, because it's in cents?

Proposal
--------

Enable improved code readability by supporting an underscore in numeric
literals to visually separate groups of digits.

.. code:: php

   $threshold = 1_000_000_000;  // a billion!
   $testValue = ‪107_925_284.88; // scale is hundreds of millions
   $discount = 135_00;          // $135, stored as cents

Underscore separators can be used in all numeric literal notations
supported by PHP:

.. code:: php

   6.674_083e-11; // float
   299_792_458;   // decimal
   0xCAFE_F00D;   // hexadecimal
   0b0101_1111;   // binary
   0137_041;      // octal

Restrictions
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The only restriction is that each underscore in a numeric literal must
be directly between two digits. This rule means that none of the
following usages are valid numeric literals:

.. code:: php

   _100; // already a valid constant name

   // these all produce "Parse error: syntax error":
   100_;       // trailing
   1__1;       // next to underscore
   1_.0; 1._0; // next to decimal point
   0x_123;     // next to x
   0b_101;     // next to b
   1_e2; 1e_2; // next to e

Unaffected PHP Functionality
----------------------------

Adding an underscore between digits in a numeric literal will not change
its value. The underscores are stripped out during the lexing stage, so
the runtime is not affected.

.. code:: php

   var_dump(1_000_000); // int(1000000)

This RFC does not change the behavior of string to number conversion.
Numeric separators are intended to improve code readability, not alter
how input is processed.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

None.

Discussion
----------

Use cases
~~~~~~~~~

Digit separators make possible the cognitive process of
`subitizing <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subitizing>`__. That is,
accurately and confidently "telling at a glance" the number of digits,
rather than having to count them. This measurably lessens the time to
correctly read numbers longer than four digits.

Large numeric literals are commonly used for business logic constants,
unit test values, and performing data conversions. For example:

Composer's retry delay when removing a file:

.. code:: php

   usleep(350000); // without separator

   usleep(350_000); // with separator

Conversion of an Active Directory timestamp (the number of
100-nanosecond intervals since January 1, 1601) to a Unix timestamp:

.. code:: php

   $time = (int) ($adTime / 10000000 - 11644473600); // without separator

   $time = (int) ($adTime / 10_000_000 - 11_644_473_600); // with separator

Working with scientific constants:

.. code:: php

   const ASTRONOMICAL_UNIT = 149597870700; // without separator

   const ASTRONOMICAL_UNIT = 149_597_870_700; // with separator

Separating bytes in a binary or hex literal:

.. code:: php

   0b01010100011010000110010101101111; // without separator

   0b01010100_01101000_01100101_01101111; // with separator

   0x42726F776E; // without separator

   0x42_72_6F_77_6E; // with separator

Use cases to avoid
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It may be tempting to use integers for storing data such as phone,
credit card, and social security numbers since these values appear
numeric. However, this is almost always a bad idea, since such numbers
often have prefixes and leading digits that are significant.

A good rule of thumb is that if it doesn't make sense to use
mathematical operators on a value (e.g. adding it, multiplying it,
etc.), then an integer probably isn't the best way to store it.

.. code:: php

   // don't do this:
   $phoneNumber = 345_6789;
   $creditCard = 231_6547_9081_2543;
   $socialSecurity = 111_11_1111;

Will it be harder to search for numbers?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A concern that has been raised is whether numeric literal separators
will make it more difficult to search for numbers, since the same value
can be written in more than one way.

This is already possible, however. The same number can be written in
binary, octal, decimal, hexadecimal, or exponential notation. In
practice, this isn't problematic as long as a codebase is consistent.

Furthermore, separators can sometimes make it easier to find numbers. To
use an earlier example, 13_500 and 135_00 could be differentiated in a
find/replace. Another example would be separated bytes in a hex literal,
which allows searching for a value like "_6F_" to find only the numbers
containing that specific byte.

Should it be the role of an IDE to group digits?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It has been suggested that numeric literal separators aren't needed for
better readability, since IDEs could be updated to automatically display
large numbers in groups of three digits.

However, it isn't always desirable to group numbers the same way. For
example, a programmer may write ``10050000`` differently depending on
whether or not it represents a financial quantity stored as cents:

.. code:: php

   $total = 100_500_00; // represents $100,500.00 stored as cents

   $total = 10_050_000; // represents $10,050,000

Binary and hex literals may also be grouped by a varying number of
digits to reflect how they are used (e.g. bits may be separated into
nibbles, bytes, or words). An IDE cannot do this automatically without
knowing the programmer's intent for each numeric literal.

Why resurrect this proposal?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The `previous RFC <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/number_format_separator>`__
was originally voted on over three years ago (January 2016). While a
majority of voters supported it, it did not reach the required 2/3
threshold for acceptance.

Based on reading the discussion at the time, it didn't receive enough
positive votes because there weren't many good use cases put forward for
it. Also, the RFC had a short voting period of only 1 week.

Since that time, the ability to use underscores in numeric literals has
been implemented in additional popular languages (e.g. Python,
JavaScript, and TypeScript), and a stronger case can be made for the
feature than was made before.

Should I vote for this feature?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Andrea Faulds summarized the considerations `as
follows <https://externals.io/email/90673/source>`__:

    This feature offers some benefit in some cases. It doesn't introduce
    much new complexity. There's no new syntax or tokens, it just
    modifies the form of the existing number tokens. It fits in well
    [with] what's already there, consistently applying to all number
    literals. It follows established convention in other languages. Its
    appearance at least hints that values with these separators are not
    constants or identifiers, but numbers, reducing potential for
    confusion. It limits its own application to prevent abuse (no
    leading, trailing, or repeated separators). And it's relatively
    intuitive.

Comparison to other languages
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Numeric literal separators are widely supported in other programming
languages.

-  Ada: single, between digits
   `1 <http://archive.adaic.com/standards/83lrm/html/lrm-02-04.html#2.4>`__
-  C#: multiple, between digits
   `2 <https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/master/proposals/csharp-7.0/digit-separators.md>`__
-  C++: single, between digits (single quote used as separator)
   `3 <http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2013/n3781.html>`__
-  Java: multiple, between digits
   `4 <https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/technotes/guides/language/underscores-literals.html>`__
-  JavaScript and TypeScript: single, between digits
   `5 <https://github.com/tc39/proposal-numeric-separator>`__
-  Julia: single, between digits
   `6 <https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/manual/integers-and-floating-point-numbers/>`__
-  Kotlin: multiple, between digits
   `7 <https://github.com/Kotlin/KEEP/blob/master/proposals/underscores-in-numeric-literals.md>`__
-  Perl: single, between digits
   `8 <https://perldoc.perl.org/perldata.html#Scalar-value-constructors>`__
-  Python: single, between digits
   `9 <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0515/>`__
-  Ruby: single, between digits
   `10 <http://ruby-doc.org/core-2.6.3/doc/syntax/literals_rdoc.html#label-Numbers>`__
-  Rust: multiple, anywhere
   `11 <https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/tokens.html#number-literals>`__
-  Swift: multiple, between digits
   `12 <https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/ReferenceManual/LexicalStructure.html#ID415>`__

Vote
----

Voting started 2019-05-30 and ended 2019-06-13.

Question: Support numeric literal separator in PHP 7.4?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

References
----------

Request to revive RFC: https://externals.io/message/105450

Discussion from previous RFC: https://externals.io/message/89925,
https://externals.io/message/90626,
https://marc.info/?l=php-internals&m=145320709922246&w=2.

Blog post about original implementation:
https://phpinternals.net/articles/implementing_a_digit_separator.

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Discussion: https://externals.io/message/105714
:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/4165
:Original Authors: , Thomas Punt, tpunt@php.net
:Original PHP Version: PHP 7.4
:Original Status: Implemented (in PHP 7.4)
:Slug: numeric_literal_separator
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/numeric_literal_separator
