Unbundle Ext/recode
===================

:PHP-RFC: 0657
:Title: Unbundle Ext/recode
:Author: Christoph M. Becker <cmb@php.net>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2019-06-14
:PHP-Version: 7.4
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

ext/recode facilitates conversion between different character
sets/encodings. This functionality is basically already supported by
ext/iconv and ext/mbstring. While the two latter extensions rely on
POSIX iconv support or libiconv, and the bundled libmbfl, respectively,
ext/recode relies on the `Recode
library <https://directory.fsf.org/wiki/Recode>`__ which is
**decomissioned** and had its latest release on 22 January 2001.

Even worse, at least according to `our
documentation <https://www.php.net/manual/en/recode.requirements.php>`__
the latest version (3.6.0) has unresolved issues, so we recommend using
Recode 3.5, which is unlikely to be still provided by contemporary OS
distributions. Furthermore, the `PHP
manual <https://www.php.net/manual/en/recode.installation.php>`__
mentions collisions with some other extensions, which appear to be still
unresolved.

Proposal
--------

For the reasons mentionend in the introduction section, I propose to
unbundle ext/recode.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

Obviously, code using ext/recode would either have to be ported to use
ext/iconv or ext/mbstring instead, or such code

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

The unbundling should be done for PHP 7.4.

Vote
----

Voting starts on 2019-06-28 and ends on 2019-07-12.

Question: Unbundle ext/recode
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Patches and Tests
-----------------

No patch required.

Implementation
--------------

#. `applied <http://git.php.net/?p=php-src.git;a=commit;h=58b607c9ea6cdc631a61b18de0cf5c0b3c96c074>`__
   to PHP-7.4 and up
#. Documentation
   `updated <http://svn.php.net/viewvc?view=revision&revision=347728>`__

References
----------

-  `Initial RFC Discussion <https://externals.io/message/105922>`__

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Christoph M. Becker, cmb@php.net
:Original Status: Implemented for PHP 7.4
:Slug: unbundle_recode
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/unbundle_recode
