__toArray()
===========

:PHP-RFC: 0666
:Title: __toArray()
:Author: Steven Wade <stevenwadejr@gmail.com>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2019-08-28
:Version: 1.1

Introduction
------------

This RFC proposes to add a new magic method called \__toArray() to allow
a class to control how it is represented when converted to an array.

PHP contains many `magic
methods <https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.oop5.magic.php>`__ that
give a class greater control over its interaction with the language. The
methods `\__serialize() and
\__unserialize() <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/custom_object_serialization>`__
give a class control over how it is serialized, \__clone() allows
control over how self copies are made, and \__toString() allows a class
to control how it is represented when converted to a string. Adding a
\__toArray() method gives developers the ability to transform a class to
an array in similar fashion.

Proposal
--------

Example:

.. code:: php


   class Person
   {
       protected $name;
       protected $email;
       
       public $foo = 'bar';

       public function __construct(string $name, string $email)
       {
           $this->name = $name;
           $this->email  = $email;
       }

       public function __toArray()
       {
           return [
               'name' => $this->name,
               'email'  => $this->email,
           ];
       }
   }

   $person = new Person('John Doe', 'j.doe@example.com');

Example usage:

.. code:: php

   $personArray = (array) $person; // casting triggers __toArray()

What this is
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The example above shows the method \__toArray() used in a type-casting
context. This proposal would have objects implementing the \__toArray()
magic method called within *any* array context including type hinting
and return types (only when using weak typing - strong typing will throw
an error).

Similar to PHP's current implementation of \__toString(), a copy of the
given object's value as an array is made upon conversion.

**Type Hinting**

.. code:: php

   function foo(array $person) {
       var_dump($person);
   }

   // Output
   /*
   array(2) {
     ["name"]=>
     string(8) "John Doe"
     ["email"]=>
     string(17) "j.doe@example.com"
   }
   */

**Return Type**

.. code:: php

   function bar(Person $person): array {
       return $person;
   }

   var_dump(bar($person));

   // Output
   /*
   array(2) {
     ["name"]=>
     string(8) "John Doe"
     ["email"]=>
     string(17) "j.doe@example.com"
   }
   */

**array_\* and built-in functions**

The array operating functions listed on the `Array
Functions <https://www.php.net/manual/en/ref.array.php>`__ would first
convert an object implementing the \__toArray() method before continuing
operations.

.. code:: php

   print_r(
       array_keys($person)
   );

   // Output
   /*
   Array
   (
       [0] => first
       [1] => email
   )
   */

Strict Types
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Automatic casting will not work when using strict types.

.. code:: php

   declare(strict_types=1);

   function bar(Person $person): array {
       return $person;
   }

   bar($person); // Throws an error: "Return value of bar() must be of the type array, object returned"

   function foo(array $person) {
       var_dump($person);
   }

   foo($person); // Throws an error: "Argument 1 passed to foo() must be of the type array, object given"

Manual casting within strict types will continue to work and is allowed.

.. code:: php

   declare(strict_types=1);

   function bar(Person $person): array {
       return (array) $person;
   }

   bar($person); // Returns an array

   function foo(array $person) {
       var_dump($person);
   }

   foo((array) $person); // Allowed

What this is not
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This proposal does not allow accessing and setting values as you would
in a normal array, that functionality remains with classes implementing
the
`ArrayAccess <https://www.php.net/manual/en/class.arrayaccess.php>`__
interface.

Array functions that operate on an array by reference such as sort or
shuffle will not work on an object implementing \__toArray() under this
proposal.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

None

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

Next PHP version (target 8.0)

RFC Impact
----------

To SAPIs
~~~~~~~~

:?: Help needed

To Existing Extensions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:?: Help needed

To Opcache
~~~~~~~~~~

:?: Help needed

Concerns
--------

A `concern raised in the initial RFC proposal
discussion <https://externals.io/message/105589#105594>`__ referred to
the existing behavior of casting and exposing object state:

   As it currently stands, the array cast is the only operation capable
   of exposing object state without triggering any kind of access
   guards: it is very much required for anything that works with
   reflection and typed properties, and possibly the only operation in
   PHP that operates on state without some contraption intercepting its
   execution.

As a response to this concern, the new get_mangled_object_vars()
function was added in `PHP
7.4 <https://github.com/php/php-src/commit/eecd8961d94c50cc6cdc94ec80df8c1ce4881a76>`__.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

Vote will require 2/3 majority

Patches and Tests
-----------------

No patch exists yet. A `proof of
concept <https://github.com/sgolemon/php-src/tree/experimental.toarray>`__
for type casting was created by Sara Golemon, but no official patch has
been created. Will need help with this.

References
----------

-  PHP Manual: `magic
   methods <https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.oop5.magic.php>`__,
   `Array Functions <https://www.php.net/manual/en/ref.array.php>`__,
   `ArrayAccess <https://www.php.net/manual/en/class.arrayaccess.php>`__
   .
-  PHP RFC: `New custom object serialization
   mechanism <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/custom_object_serialization>`__ .
-  Initial idea and discussion: https://externals.io/message/105589 .

Rejected Features
-----------------

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Steven Wade, stevenwadejr@gmail.com
:Original Status: Under Discussion
:Slug: to-array
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/to-array
