Allow ::class On Objects
========================

:PHP-RFC: 0680
:Title: Allow ::class On Objects
:Author: Nikita Popov <nikic@php.net>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2020-01-09
:PHP-Version: 8.0
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

The ``Foo\Bar::class`` syntax has been introduced in PHP 5.5 to allow
fetching a class name as a string, in a way that respects
context-dependent name resolution rules and is understood by IDEs. As it
is syntactically similar to a class constant access, programmers
intuitively expect the syntax ``$object::class`` to work as well and
provide the same result as ``get_class($object)``. This RFC proposes to
allow that syntax.

The original rationale for not allowing the ``$object::class`` syntax
was that ``Foo\Bar::class`` is resolved at compile-time, which is not
possible for ``$object::class``. However, this premise is already
incorrect for two cases: First, ``static::class`` is always resolved at
runtime, equivalent to ``get_called_class()``. Second, ``self::class``
and ``parent::class`` are also sometimes resolved at runtime, for
example in closures.

Overall I think that ``$object::class`` has a well-defined meaning, and
programmers familiar with the ``Foo\Bar::class`` syntax generally expect
it to be available by symmetry with the general ``$object::CONST_NAME``
syntax. Not allowing the syntax is more surprising than allowing it.

Proposal
--------

``$object::class`` is already permitted on the syntax level, but
currently throws a compile error. This error will be removed when used
in a normal expression context. However, ``$object::class`` will remain
forbidden inside a constant expression context (as objects cannot be
created there).

If ``$object`` is an object, then ``$object::class`` returns
``get_class($object)``. Otherwise it throws a ``TypeError`` exception.

.. code:: php

   $object = new stdClass;
   var_dump($object::class); // "stdClass"

   $object = null;
   var_dump($object::class); // TypeError

This RFC does not permit ``$object`` to be a string and throws a
``TypeError`` in that case as well. It would be possible to allow
strings to be consistent with the ``$className::CONST_NAME`` syntax. In
that case, ``$str::class`` would return ``$str`` verbatim. As this
doesn't seem practically useful, and likely somewhat surprising (esp.
the fact that the class name is not validated at all, and can contain
characters not allowed in class names), this functionality is omitted.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

There are no backwards incompatible changes.

Vote
----

Voting started 2020-01-28 and ends 2020-02-11.

Question: Allow ::class on objects?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/5065
:Original Authors: Nikita Popov nikic@php.net
:Original PHP Version: PHP 8.0
:Slug: class_name_literal_on_object
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/class_name_literal_on_object
