Increment/Decrement Fixes
=========================

:PHP-RFC: 0693
:Title: Increment/Decrement Fixes
:Author: Rowan Tommins [IMSoP] <rowan.collins@gmail.com>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2020-03-08
:Version: 1.1

Introduction
------------

Intuitively, the ``++`` and ``--`` operators are equivalent to "add 1 to
variable" and "subtract 1 from variable", respectively. As such, it
would be expected that ``$a=$a+1``, ``$a+=1``, and ``++$a`` would end up
with the same value in ``$a``; and likewise, ``$a=$a-1``, ``$a-=1``, and
``--$a``. However, because they are implemented separately, this is not
always the case. This RFC proposes changes to the handling of null and
array values.

Most arithmetic operators, including ``+`` and ``+=`` are implemented
for non-numeric types by implicitly casting to integer, then performing
the requested operation. However, ``++`` and ``--`` are implemented
separately for each type via a switch statement in the engine; rather
than coercing the current value to an integer, the default case in this
switch statement is to silently leave the value unchanged.

On top of this, the ``++`` operator has a specific implementation for
``null``, but the ``--`` operator does not, leading to an even more
surprising inconsistency.

Fix or remove?
--------------

A common concern is that fixing these inconsistencies would imply
"endorsing" or even "encouraging" the use of these operators with
non-numeric types. It would perhaps be better to make these operations
into errors, either immediately in PHP 8.0, or plan ahead to doing so in
future. If this is likely to happen, then changing the behaviour in any
backwards incompatible way would mean users having to change code twice,
which would be undesirable.

The position of this RFC is that arithmetic operators should either be
consistently allowed or consistently disallowed on a particular type. In
particular, if ``$a+=1`` and ``$a-=1`` do not error, then ``$a++`` and
``$a--`` should not error either.

The balance of these factors is assessed for each type below, but in
summary:

-  For arrays, throw an error in 8.0, because most operators already do
-  For objects, resources, and booleans, assume that an error will be
   proposed in a future RFC
-  For null, continue to allow arithmetic operators, and fix the missing
   implementation of ``--``

Strings
-------

Strings overload the ``++`` and ``--`` operators with complex behaviour
which mixes text and arithmetic logic. Improving this deserves its own
discussion, so will not be discussed further in this RFC.

Arrays
------

Adding an integer to an array throws an Error with the message
"Unsupported operand types", as do most other arithmetic operators.
However, incrementing or decrementing an array leaves it unchanged, with
no Notice, Warning, or Error.

This RFC proposes to change the behaviour so that ``$a=[]; $a++;`` (or
``++$a``) and ``$a=[]; $a--;`` (or ``--$a``) raise the same error as
``$a = [] + 1;``.

+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
|       | In    | $a =  | $a += | ++$a, | $a =  | $a -= | --$a, |
|       | itial | $a +  | 1     | $a++  | $a -  | 1     | $a--  |
|       | Value | 1     |       |       | 1     |       |       |
+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+
| Cu    | any   | Error | Error | no    | Error | Error | no    |
| rrent | array |       |       | e     |       |       | e     |
|       |       |       |       | ffect |       |       | ffect |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| Pro   | any   | Error | Error | Error | Error | Error | Error |
| posed | array |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+

Objects, resources, and booleans
--------------------------------

Most arithmetic operations will implicitly cast non-numeric types to
integer as follows:

-  Objects (other than internal objects with operator overloading) are
   cast to 1, and an E_NOTICE is raised
-  Resources are cast to their internal ID
-  false is cast to 0
-  true is cast to 1

The ``++`` and ``--`` operators currently have no implementation for
these types, so silently leave the value unchanged. This leads to the
following inconsistent behaviour:

+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| Initial | $a = $a | $a += 1 | ++$a,   | $a = $a | $a -= 1 | --$a,   |
| Value   | + 1     |         | $a++    | - 1     |         | $a--    |
+=========+=========+=========+=========+=========+=========+=========+
| any     | 2 (with | 2 (with | no      | 0 (with | 0 (with | no      |
| object  | E_      | E_      | effect  | E_      | E_      | effect  |
|         | NOTICE) | NOTICE) |         | NOTICE) | NOTICE) |         |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| res     | 2       | 2       | no      | 0       | 0       | no      |
| ource#1 |         |         | effect  |         |         | effect  |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| res     | 6       | 6       | no      | 4       | 4       | no      |
| ource#5 |         |         | effect  |         |         | effect  |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| false   | 1       | 1       | false   | -1      | -1      | false   |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| true    | 2       | 2       | true    | 0       | 0       | true    |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+

Possible options:

-  A: Implement ``++`` and ``--`` with an implicit cast, to match other
   arithmetic operators.
-  B: Raise an error for ``++`` and ``--``, but leave other operators
   unchanged.
-  C: Raise an error for all arithmetic operators.

The position of this RFC is that option A brings very little benefit for
these types, because the resulting values aren't particularly intuitive
or useful. On the other hand, option B simply swaps one inconsistency
for another. Option C has the added benefit of bringing the behaviour of
these types in line with the behaviour of arrays.

The implications of introducing such an error deserve their own RFC. For
instance, it was mentioned in
`rfc/engine_warnings <rfc/engine_warnings>`__ that the ``==`` operator
currently falls back to an integer cast for cases such as ``$a == 1``
which should not constitute a Type Error.

The position of this RFC is to leave these types unchanged, in the
expectation of a further RFC implementing option C.

Null
----

Nulls deserve special consideration for two reasons:

-  The implicit coercion to int is significantly more useful than for
   other types
-  The ``++`` operator already works, leaving just ``--`` as an anomaly

Current inconsistency
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For nearly all arithmetic operators, ``null`` is silently coerced to
``0``. Unlike the other types mentioned in this RFC, this applies
equally to the ``++`` operator. Oddly, however, the ``--`` operator is
not implemented for null, and leaves the variable unchanged.

This behaviour has been raised as a bug at least three times
(`#20548 <https://bugs.php.net/bug.php?id=20548>`__,
`#25674 <https://bugs.php.net/bug.php?id=25674>`__,
`#41690 <https://bugs.php.net/bug.php?id=41690>`__). All three are
closed, and it is `documented in the
manual <https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.operators.increment.php>`__,
but no evidence has been put forward that this is intentional behaviour,
rather than a very old bug retained for compatibility.

Consider the following patch, which looks like a straight-forward
simplification:

.. code:: diff

     function foo($bar) {
   -     $bar -= 1;
   +     $bar--;
         // more code here
     }

The old code always results in an integer in ``$bar`` after the first
line of the function; the new code does not do so if a null value is
passed, because of the missing ``--`` implementation.

The asymmetry of ``++`` and ``--`` is even more confusing. Consider this
patch:

.. code:: diff

     function repeatThing($extraTimes) {
   -      for ( $i = 0; $i <= $extraTimes; $i++ ) {
   +      for ( $i = $extraTimes; $i >= 0; $i-- ) {
              doThing($i);
          }
     }

Again, this looks like a safe change, reversing the order of the loop;
but if passed a value of NULL, the old code will call doThing() once,
and the new code will enter an infinite loop.

Options
~~~~~~~

There are four main options to improve the situation:

-  A: Implement ``--`` with an implicit cast, to match other arithmetic
   operators including ``++``.
-  B1: Raise an error for ``--``, but leave other operators including
   ``++`` unchanged.
-  B2: Raise an error for both ``++`` and ``--``, but leave other
   operators unchanged.
-  C: Raise an error for all arithmetic operators.

Option B1 is in some ways the safest, because it makes the change
immediately visible, and most cases affected are probably already buggy.
However, it is hard to justify raising an error for ``$a--`` without at
least a plan to deprecate the obvious counterpart ``$a++``. A similar
argument applies to option B2, which would introduce a breaking change
for ``$a++``, but users could simply switch to ``$a+=1`` and get no
error.

Removing null to int coercion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Should we then go with Option C, as proposed for other types? That is,
should we introduce, either immediately, or via a staged deprecation, a
Type Error for arithmetic operations where either argument is null?

An important consideration is that undefined variables, array items, and
object properties are currently treated as having a value of null. While
it has been suggested to change this to an error in a future version,
there is no clear consensus to do so. This means operations on null are
more common than the other types we have discussed, and are likely to
remain so.

Furthermore, the value when coerced to int is more intuitive, and more
likely to be useful. It is fairly reasonable that
``$price * $_GET['quantity']`` will result in zero if no quantity was
provided; or that ``$price -= $discount`` leaves the value unchanged if
there is no discount defined.

Even the increment operator itself can be useful with null / unitialised
values, for instance in this common implementation of "count items in
each category":

.. code:: php

   $counts = [];
   foreach ( $items as $item ) {
       $counts[$item->getCategory()]++;
   }

If there was no implicit default of zero, an extra line such as
``$counts[$item->getCategory()] ??= 0;`` would need to be added, but
this neither expresses the intent (a count of zero is never returned)
nor avoids any bugs (we know that the array has been initialised empty).

Since the case for removing null to int coercion is much less decisive
than for other types, this RFC makes the assumption that no such removal
is likely in the short term. As such, waiting for that removal does not
solve the immediate problem of inconsistency between ``++`` and ``--``.

Fixing the decrement case
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As mentioned above, no evidence has been put forward that the missing
definition of decrement for null is intentional.

This RFC therefore proposes to fix this bug, so that ``$a=null; $a--;``
or ``$a=null; --$a;`` will result in $a holding -1. This brings it into
line with all other mathematical operations, including ``$a++``, which
treat null as equivalent to 0.

+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
|       | In    | $a =  | $a += | ++$a, | $a =  | $a -= | --$a, |
|       | itial | $a +  | 1     | $a++  | $a -  | 1     | $a--  |
|       | Value | 1     |       |       | 1     |       |       |
+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+
| Cu    | null  | 1     | 1     | 1     | -1    | -1    | null  |
| rrent |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| Pro   | null  | 1     | 1     | 1     | -1    | -1    | -1    |
| posed |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

The additional error on increment and decrement for arrays is likely to
mostly affect code which already contains bugs, and as a fatal will be
easily detected.

The fix to decrement on nulls is harder to detect. While it's unlikely
that any code is deliberately relying on the current behaviour, it may
inadvertently be doing so. It would be sensible to provide links in
official upgrading documentation to static analysis tools which can
point out potentially affected code.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

8.0

RFC Impact
----------

On OpCache
~~~~~~~~~~

If there is currently any optimisation based on the non-implementation
of decrement for nulls, or the behaviour of increment and decrement for
arrays, this will need to be amended if the respective votes pass.

Open Issues
-----------

None at time of initial discussion.

Unaffected PHP Functionality
----------------------------

As mentioned above, this RFC proposed no changes to handling of strings,
booleans, objects, or resources.

It also does not directly propose any changes to operators other than
``++`` and ``--``, although it recommends that a future RFC does so for
the above types.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

The two proposed changes can be implemented independently, so two
separate votes are proposed, each requiring the standard 2/3
super-majority to be accepted:

-  Should decrementing null be fixed in line with incrementing and with
   subtraction, so that ``$a=null; $a--;`` results in ``-1``? (Yes / No)
-  Should incrementing or decrementing an array throw an "Unsupported
   operand types" error, in line with other arithmetic operations? (Yes
   / No)

Patches and Tests
-----------------

None yet. The implementation should be a simple addition to the
``increment_function`` and ``decrement_function`` definitions in
``Zend/zend_operators.c``.

Implementation
--------------

TODO

References
----------

-  `Pre-RFC discussion <https://externals.io/message/108602>`__
-  `RFC: Alphanumeric
   Decrement <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/alpanumeric_decrement>`__
   (rejected)
-  `RFC: Normalize
   inc/dec <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/normalize_inc_dec>`__ (inactive)

Rejected Features
-----------------

A previous version of the RFC proposed fixing the implementation for
booleans to match integer coercion followed by adding or substracting 1.
The current draft instead groups booleans with objects and resources, as
warranting a separate RFC proposing an error.

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Rowan Tommins [IMSoP], rowan.collins@gmail.com
:Original Status: Under Discussion
:Slug: increment_decrement_fixes
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/increment_decrement_fixes
