Allow Trailing Comma In Parameter List
======================================

:PHP-RFC: 0707
:Title: Allow Trailing Comma In Parameter List
:Author: Nikita Popov <nikic@php.net>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2020-03-26
:PHP-Version: 8.0
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

This RFC proposes to allow an optional trailing comma in parameter
lists. This is already supported for argument lists.

Consider the constructor of the `League\Uri\Uri
class <https://github.com/thephpleague/uri/blob/70e1b5044dbf923146a81a0869a67c71548cc880/src/Uri.php#L283-L302>`__:

.. code:: php

   class Uri {
       private function __construct(
           ?string $scheme,
           ?string $user,
           ?string $pass,
           ?string $host,
           ?int $port,
           string $path,
           ?string $query,
           ?string $fragment // <-- ARGH!
       ) {
           ...
       }
   }

This constructor has too many parameters to place all of them on one
line, at least under conventional coding standards. In such cases
`PSR-12 <https://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-12/#45-method-and-function-arguments>`__
recommends to use the formatting above instead.

Unfortunately, it is currently not possible to place a trailing comma in
the parameter list. This breaks uniformity, and results in larger diffs
when a new optional parameter is added. Additionally, it is inconsistent
with call-sites, which **do** allow a trailing comma:

.. code:: php

   new Uri(
       $scheme,
       $user,
       $pass,
       $host,
       $port,
       $path,
       $query,
       $fragment, // <-- Huh, this is allowed!
   );

At this point, I'm used to *always* adding a trailing comma to
multi-line lists, regardless of what kind of element they contain. I
write the comma by default, and then have to go back to remove it upon
receiving an error. We should avoid having this kind of arbitrary
restriction.

Proposal
--------

Allow a single optional trailing comma in parameter lists. This includes
parameter lists for functions, methods and closures.

Prior Art
---------

`Allow a trailing comma in function
calls </rfc/trailing-comma-function-calls>`__ added support for trailing
commas in calls.

`Trailing Commas In List Syntax </rfc/list-syntax-trailing-commas>`__
was a previous proposal to support optional trailing commas in all
list-like structures.

Nothing has substantially changed since those RFCs in technical terms,
but I think the aforementioned style for breaking up large parameter
lists has become more accepted in the meantime, and features like
`Constructor Property Promotion </rfc/constructor_promotion>`__ are
going to increase its use further.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

None.

Vote
----

Voting opened 2020-04-14 and closes 2020-04-28.

Question: Allow trailing comma in parameter lists?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/5306
:Original Authors: Nikita Popov nikic@php.net
:Original PHP Version: PHP 8.0
:Slug: trailing_comma_in_parameter_list
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/trailing_comma_in_parameter_list
