Ensure Correct Signatures Of Magic Methods
==========================================

:PHP-RFC: 0713
:Title: Ensure Correct Signatures Of Magic Methods
:Author: Gabriel Caruso <carusogabriel@php.net>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2020-04-05
:PHP-Version: 8.0
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

It is currently possible to write magic methods that have signatures
that don't match the signature expected, such as *\__clone(): float* or
*\__isset(): Closure*.

This behavior of allowing incorrect signatures was reported as `a
bug <https://bugs.php.net/69718>`__.

As ensuring magic methods have correct signatures is a backward
compatible break for code that currently has incorrect signatures, this
change would only be appropriate in a major PHP release.

Motivation
----------

PHP's Magic Methods is something that PHP provides allowing developers
to track and act on specific changes of behavior of a certain class.
Given that fact, the same should ensure that the end-users are using
these methods consistently across different codebases.

Since the introduction of types in PHP 7.0, only the checks list below
were introduced to make sure that developers are using PHP's magic
methods correctly:

-  *\__clone()* return type: https://3v4l.org/Ub54p
-  *\__construct()* return type: https://3v4l.org/CCL11
-  *\__destruct()* return type: https://3v4l.org/HNkgW
-  *\__toString()* return type:
   https://3v4l.org/jIg7b/rfc#git-php-master

For PHP 8, this RFC aims to expand these checks.

Proposal
--------

This RFC proposes to add parameter and return types checks per the
following details. Other magic methods will be not modified.

The proposal follows the `Magic Methods
documentation <https://php.net/oop5.magic>`__.

.. code:: php

   Foo::__call(string $name, array $arguments): mixed;

   Foo::__callStatic(string $name, array $arguments): mixed;

   Foo::__clone(): void;

   Foo::__debugInfo(): ?array;

   Foo::__get(string $name): mixed;

   Foo::__invoke(mixed $arguments): mixed;

   Foo::__isset(string $name): bool;

   Foo::__serialize(): array;

   Foo::__set(string $name, mixed $value): void;

   Foo::__set_state(array $properties): object;

   Foo::__sleep(): array;

   Foo::__unserialize(array $data): void;

   Foo::__unset(string $name): void;

   Foo::__wakeup(): void;

**Note:** The *\__construct()* and *\__destruct()* methods won't suffer
any changes. They won't allow *void* as a return type given the fact
that (almost) all languages, including PHP, don't have the concept of
Constructors and Destructors "returning" something after their
execution.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

To Magic Methods without types declared
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

None.

To Magic Methods with the wrong signatures
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Magic methods' signatures not matching the ones listed above, an error
will be thrown, a *Fatal Error* more specific, following the errors of
the same kind that are placed today.

RFC Impact
----------

Scraping the top 1000 Composer packages (using Nikita's
`script <https://gist.github.com/nikic/a2bfa3e2f604f66115c3e4b8963a6c72>`__),
`the
results <https://gist.github.com/carusogabriel/e0b36e7cd9e6846e04f79008cb7e35d6>`__
show only 7 occurrences of not matching signatures.

Luckily, none of them is a problem as *\__call()*, *\__callStatic()* and
*\__get()* do not have checks at this time.

Even with a *mixed* RFC that wouldn't be a problem, as `a specific type
can override
it <https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/ad7e93a023a9/Zend/tests/type_declarations/mixed/inheritance/mixed_return_inheritance_success2.phpt>`__,
by the Liskov Substitution Principle.

Future Scope
------------

This RFC only aims to add checks for the methods' signatures but as a
Future Scope, a runtime check of what is been returning in the methods
could be added, same as

-  *\__serialize()*: https://3v4l.org/HLiTj
-  *\__toString()*: https://3v4l.org/Dbe6G
-  *\__debugInfo()*: https://3v4l.org/0EEPh
-  *\__sleep()*: https://3v4l.org/dH96A

Voting
------

Voting started on 2020-05-29 at 18h (CEST) and ends on 2020-06-19 at 18h
(CEST).

Question: Ensure correct signatures of magic methods
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

External resources
------------------

- Discussion thread: https://externals.io/message/109542

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/4177
:Original Authors: Gabriel Caruso (carusogabriel@php.net)
:Original PHP Version: PHP 8.0
:Slug: magic-methods-signature
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/magic-methods-signature
