Non-capturing Catches
=====================

:PHP-RFC: 0714
:Title: Non-capturing Catches
:Author: Max Semenik <maxsem.wiki@gmail.com>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2020-04-05
:PHP-Version: 8.0
:Version: 0.9

Introduction
------------

Currently, PHP requires to capture the exception being caught to a
variable:

.. code:: php

   try {
       foo();
   } catch (SomeException $ex) {
       die($ex->getMessage());
   }

However, you need to specify the variable even if it's not used:

.. code:: php

   try {
       changeImportantData();
   } catch (PermissionException $ex) {
       echo "You don't have permission to do this";
   }

Someone reading the above code is left to wonder if the author intended
to not use the exception variable or it's a bug.

Proposal
--------

Allow catching exceptions without capturing them to variables:

.. code:: php

   try {
       changeImportantData();
   } catch (PermissionException) { // The intention is clear: exception details are irrelevant
       echo "You don't have permission to do this";
   }

Prior art
---------

Such change was first proposed in `this
RFC <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/anonymous_catch>`__ 7 years ago. It was
turned down mostly because it also wanted to allow blanket catches like
this:

.. code:: php

   try {
       foo();
   } catch {
       bar();
   }

Meanwhile what I'm proposing here has received mostly positive feedback
so I feel it's worth revisiting.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

None.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

8.0

RFC Impact
----------

None.

Vote
----

Voting started on 2020-05-10 and will end on 2020-05-24 at 9:00 UTC.

Question: Accept this RFC?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Patches and Tests
-----------------

\* https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/5345

Implementation
--------------

After the project is implemented, this section should contain

#. the version(s) it was merged into
#. a link to the git commit(s)
#. a link to the PHP manual entry for the feature
#. a link to the language specification section (if any)

References
----------

\* https://externals.io/message/109550 - initial announcements

Rejected Features
-----------------

Keep this updated with features that were discussed on the mail lists.

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/5345
:Original Authors: Max Semenik maxsem.wiki@gmail.com
:Original Status: Implemented in PHP 8.0
:Slug: non-capturing_catches
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/non-capturing_catches
