Attribute Amendments
====================

:PHP-RFC: 0725
:Title: Attribute Amendments
:Author: Benjamin Eberlei <beberlei@php.net>, Martin Schröder
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2020-05-11
:PHP-Version: 8.0
:Version: 1.2

Introduction
------------

This RFC discusses a few amendments to the `original Attributes
RFC <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/attributes_v2>`__ that was accepted for
PHP 8.

Rename PhpAttribute class to Attribute
--------------------------------------

Important Context: Since the acceptence of Attributes, the
PhpCompilerAttribute and PhpAttribute classes were unified to be only
PhpAttribute. This was needed because the previous approach of
disallowing the use of <<PhpCompilerAttribute>> in userland would break
"stub" generation that static analysis and IDEs rely on to fill their
type database of internal functions/classes. Without it there was no
functionality left in PhpCompilerAttribute to preserve.

The original RFC introduced a *PhpAttribute* class to be added to new
userland attributes. This name was inspired by *PhpToken* and to
potentially avoid breaking existing userland codebases with a class
called *Attribute*. However the *Php* prefix makes no sense for the
attribute class compared to *PhpToken*.

In absence of a namespace policy, the global namespace is PHPs
namespace. The documentation states as much and the vote on
https://wiki.php.net/rfc/php-namespace-in-core confirmed this.

Therefore we propose to rename *PhpAttribute* to be just *Attribute* and
in addition recommend that all internal/compiler attributes should be
placed under the global namespace as well.

Extensions providing non-core attributes should consider using their own
namespace, but this RFC makes no recommendation or rule about this.

Group statement for Attributes
------------------------------

Right now each attribute requires to be surrounded by the T_SL/T_SR
tokens:

.. code:: php

   <<Attr1>><<Attr2>>
   class Example
   {
       <<Attr2("foo")>>
       <<Attr2("bar")>>
       public function test()
       {
       }
   }

We propose to allow a second syntax/style to group attributes in one
declaration:

.. code:: php

   <<Attr1, Attr2>>
   class Example
   {
       <<Attr2("foo"),
         Attr2("bar")>>
       public function test()
       {
       }
   }

In line with many other recent RFCs, trailing commas will also be
possible in an attribute group declarations:

.. code:: php

       <<
         Attr1("foo"),
         Attr2("bar"),
       >>
       public function test()
       {
       }

This feature would be superseded by any other RFC getting accepted that
changes the syntax.

Validate Attribute Target Declarations
--------------------------------------

At the moment an attribute can be put on any kind of declaration and the
developer of the attribute has no way of restricting the usage to only a
subset of declarations. This functionality is only available to internal
attributes for now.

As an example, a developer might introduce an attribute to declare what
database table a class is stored in:

.. code:: php

   use ORM\Attributes\Table;

   <<Table("users")>>
   class User
   {
   }

But they cannot prevent the Table attribute being used on another
declaration where it semantically does not belong:

.. code:: php

   use ORM\Attributes\Table;

   class User
   {
       <<Table("users")>>
       public $id;
   }

We propose that you can optionally restrict the declarations an
attribute can be used on by setting an optional argument to
*PhpAttribute* (or *Attribute*).

.. code:: php

   namespace ORM\Attributes;

   <<PhpAttribute(PhpAttribute::TARGET_CLASS)>>
   class Table
   {
   }

The following constants will be added to *PhpAttribute*:

.. code:: php

   class PhpAttribute
   {
       public const int TARGET_CLASS = 1;
       public const int TARGET_FUNCTION = (1 << 1);
       public const int TARGET_METHOD = (1 << 2);
       public const int TARGET_PROPERTY = (1 << 3);
       public const int TARGET_CLASS_CONSTANT = (1 << 4);
       public const int TARGET_PARAMETER = (1 << 5);
       public const int TARGET_ALL = ((1 << 6) - 1);

       public function __construct(int $flags = self::TARGET_ALL)
       {
       }
   }

Important note: The target definition of an attribute is validated
during the call to *ReflectionAttribute::newInstance*. In fact it does
not influence a call to *Reflection*::getAttributes()* and
*ReflectionAttribute* instances can be returned from this method, that
are not valid on the reflected declaration. This is in line with the
deferred validation of userland attributes that the original RFC
championed.

Validate Attribute Repeatability
--------------------------------

At the moment every attribute can be repeated multiple times on a
declaration. For many use cases of attributes this is not desired.

For this reason we propose that by default attributes are not
repeatable, and only if the *PhpAttribute* has the flag *IS_REPEATABLE*
should it be possible to use it multiple times on the same declaration:

.. code:: php

   class PhpAttribute
   {
       public const int IS_REPEATABLE = ((1 << 10));
   }

   <<PhpAttribute(self::IS_REPEATABLE)>>
   class Route
   {
   }

   class HomepageController
   {
       <<Route("/")>>
       <<Route("/homepage")>>
       public function indexAction()
       {
       }
   }

Important note: The repeatable flag of an attribute is validated during
the call to *ReflectionAttribute::newInstance*. In fact it does not
influence a call to *Reflection*::getAttributes()* and
*ReflectionAttribute* instances can be returned from this method, that
are not valid on the reflected declaration. This is in line with the
deferred validation of userland attributes that the original RFC
championed.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

Introducing a class *Attribute* into the global namespace is certainly
going to break at least a handful of applications using this class name.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

8.0

RFC Impact
----------

To SAPIs
~~~~~~~~

none

To Existing Extensions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

none

To Opcache
~~~~~~~~~~

none

Open Issues
-----------

none

Vote
----

Voting will end on June 22nd, 2020 - 8:00 UTC.

.. _rename-phpattribute-class-to-attribute-1:

Rename PhpAttribute class to Attribute
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: Should PhpAttribute be renamed to Attribute?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

.. _group-statement-for-attributes-1:

Group statement for Attributes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: Should a secondary grouped syntax for attributes be introduced?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-1:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

.. _validate-attribute-target-declarations-1:

Validate Attribute Target Declarations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: Should attributes allow definition of target declarations?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-2:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

.. _validate-attribute-repeatability-1:

Validate Attribute Repeatability
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: Should attributes allow definition of repeatability?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-3:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Patches and Tests
-----------------

#. https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/5751

References
----------

#. `Attributes RFC <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/attributes_v2>`__

Updates
-------

#. 1.0 Initial RFC (11.5.2020)
#. 1.1 Attributes\Attribute namespace (28.5.2020)
#. 1.2 Revert Attributes\Attribute namespace, make IS_REPEATABLE flag on
   PhpAttribute (4.6.2020)

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Benjamin Eberlei (beberlei@php.net), Martin Schröder
:Patch: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/5751
:Slug: attribute_amendments
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/attribute_amendments
