Shorter Attribute Syntax
========================

:PHP-RFC: 0737
:Title: Shorter Attribute Syntax
:Author: Theodore Brown <theodorejb@outlook.com>, Martin Schröder
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2020-06-03
:PHP-Version: 8.0
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

We propose to use ``@@Attr`` or ``#[Attr]`` as the attribute syntax in
PHP 8.0 instead of ``<<Attr>>``.

Background
~~~~~~~~~~

Early last month, the `Attributes
v2 <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/attributes_v2>`__ RFC was accepted for PHP
8.0. During voting there was a syntax choice between ``<<Attr>>`` and
``@:Attr``, and the former was preferred by an approximately 3/4
majority.

However, this syntax has several noteworthy shortcomings:

1. Verbosity
~~~~~~~~~~~~

In this example from the RFC, there are more characters used for the
``<<`` and ``>>`` tokens than for the attribute name itself:

.. code:: php

   <<Jit>>
   function foo() {}

Especially once more than one attribute needs to be added, the syntax
can get quite noisy and difficult to read at a glance. To alleviate
this, the `Attribute
Amendments <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/attribute_amendments>`__ RFC
proposes to allow grouping multiple attributes between one pair of
``<<`` and ``>>`` tokens:

.. code:: php

   <<Attr1("foo"),
     Attr2("bar")>>
   public function test() {}

Unfortunately, this results in another problem: adding a new attribute
at the start or end of the list, or removing one of the attributes, will
require modifying multiple lines, which adds noise to diffs. Notably,
the proposal does allow trailing commas, so the code could be written
like this instead:

.. code:: php

   <<
     Attr1("foo"),
     Attr2("bar"),
   >>
   public function test() {}

But now two extra lines are needed for the ``<<`` and ``>>`` tokens, and
multiple lines will likely still be modified when moving from one
attribute to two attributes, or vice versa.

2. Lack of nested attributes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Nested annotations are quite common in apps using Doctrine. Here's an
example `from the
documentation <https://www.doctrine-project.org/projects/doctrine-orm/en/2.7/reference/association-mapping.html#mapping-defaults>`__:

::

   @JoinTable(
       name="User_Group",
       joinColumns={@JoinColumn(name="User_id", referencedColumnName="id")},
       inverseJoinColumns={@JoinColumn(name="Group_id", referencedColumnName="id")}
   )

While nested attributes with the ``<<>>`` syntax should technically be
possible, there was general agreement among the implementers that this
approach crosses a line of unacceptable ugliness. For example:

.. code:: php

   <<JoinTable(
       "User_Group",
       <<JoinColumn("User_id", "id")>>,
       <<JoinColumn("Group_id", "id")>>,
   )>>
   private $groups;

A somewhat more readable approach would be to allow ``new Attr()``
expressions for nested attributes:

.. code:: php

   <<JoinTable(
       "User_Group",
       new JoinColumn("User_id", "id"),
       new JoinColumn("Group_id", "id"),
   )>>
   private $groups;

The downside of this is that it can lead to confusion about which
expressions are supported (e.g. ``new Foo()`` would be allowed but
``Foo::create()`` wouldn't work). Furthermore, it turned out to be very
difficult to implement this, and the feature was ultimately given up on
since it would require a lot of changes to const expressions.

3. Confusion with generics
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Although there isn't technically a conflict between the syntax for
attributes and generics, once generics are supported in PHP it may be
harder to tell at a glance where generics are being used as opposed to
attributes.

4. Confusion with shift operators and const arguments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reusing shift tokens can make it difficult to tell if a line contains
multiple attributes, or a shift operator in a constant expression:

.. code:: php

   <<Bar(2 * (3 + 3)>>Baz, (4 + 5) * 2)>>
   function foo() {}

Of course, bit shifts will rarely be used in this context. However, for
developers who are used to working with shift operators, reusing the
same syntax to delineate attributes may still result in less readable
code due to this association. Furthermore, if the grouped attribute
proposal is accepted, there can be similar confusion between comma
separated attributes and attribute arguments:

.. code:: php

   <<Attr1(2 * 3 + 3), Bar(4 + 5 * 2)>>
   <<Attr2(2 * (3 + 3), Baz, (4 + 5) * 2)>>
   function foo() {}

5. Dissimilarity to other languages
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Most other languages in the C family use either ``[Attr]`` or ``@Attr``
for their attribute syntax, requiring just one or two characters, rather
than four (see comparison further below).

Proposal
--------

Use ``@@Attr`` instead of ``<<Attr>>`` for the attribute syntax in PHP
8.0 (using a new ``T_ATTRIBUTE`` token).

This solves each of the above issues. It requires half as many
characters, reducing verbosity in line with most other languages that
have attributes:

.. code:: php

   @@Jit
   function foo() {}

The ``@@`` syntax doesn't have any conflicts with nested attributes, so
it will be straightforward to add support for them in the future if
desired (without needing any special cases or changes to const
expressions):

.. code:: php

   @@JoinTable(
       "User_Group",
       @@JoinColumn("User_id", "id"),
       @@JoinColumn("Group_id", "id"),
   )
   private $groups;

The shorter syntax can also improve code readability by making it easier
to tell at a glance where attributes are used as opposed to generics or
shift operators. Lastly, it avoids the problem of needing to modify
multiple lines when adding or removing a single attribute:

.. code:: php

   @@Attr1("foo")
   @@Attr2("bar") // this line can be added or removed independent of other lines
   public function test() {}

A small side benefit of the ``@@`` syntax is the ability to easily grep
for attributes. Besides being used as a shift operator, ``<<`` also
occurs in heredocs/nowdocs which would add noise to simple attribute
searches.

Additional examples
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

So far the RFC has shown attributes on functions, methods, and class
properties. For completeness, here's how the proposed syntax looks with
classes (or interfaces or traits), class constants, parameters,
anonymous classes, and closures:

.. code:: php

   @@ExampleAttribute
   class Foo
   {
       @@ExampleAttribute
       public const FOO = 'foo';

       public function foo(@@ExampleAttribute Type $bar) {}
   }

   $object = new @@ExampleAttribute class () {};

   $f1 = @@ExampleAttribute function () {};

   $f2 = @@ExampleAttribute fn() => 1;

Alternative #[] syntax
----------------------

An alternative to using ``@@Attr`` would be to borrow the ``#[attr]``
syntax from Rust. This would have the benefit of reusing the same syntax
as another language, and it is also potentially forwards compatible for
single-line attributes. E.g. the following code could work with both PHP
7 and PHP 8 (the attribute is treated as a comment on PHP 7):

.. code:: php

   #[Attribute]
   final class Covers {}

So with this syntax, in theory it would be possible for a library to
support both native PHP 8 attributes and PHP 7 docblock annotations with
the same code. E.g. PHPUnit could introduce a ``Covers`` attribute class
which would also work in PHP 7 to encapsulate information from an
``@covers`` docblock annotation.

However, this benefit would be lost as soon as a library wants to depend
on any other PHP 8 features, and it will become irrelevant anyway once
most users upgrade to PHP 8. With the ``@@`` syntax, libraries can still
support both native attributes and docblock annotations, they just would
need to use a different class (or a parent class) to encapsulate the
docblock arguments on PHP 7.x.

Downsides
~~~~~~~~~

-  Larger BC break than ``@@`` (see Backward Incompatible Changes
   section below).
-  Slightly more verbose than ``@@``, which works against one of the
   goals of this RFC.
-  Arguably more difficult to type than ``@@`` on common qwerty keyboard
   layouts.
-  Syntax may be confusing for some, since it looks more like a comment
   than the existing docblock annotations developers are familiar with.

Additional examples with #[]
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Note: JavaScript syntax highlighting is used so ``#`` doesn't appear as
a comment.

.. code:: ecmascript

   #[Jit]
   function foo() {}

   class Foo
   {
       #[ExampleAttribute]
       public const FOO = 'foo';

       // with potential nesting in future
       #[JoinTable(
           "User_Group",
           #[JoinColumn("User_id", "id")],
           #[JoinColumn("Group_id", "id")],
       )]
       private $groups;

       #[ExampleAttribute]
       public function foo(#[ExampleAttribute] Type $bar) {}
   }

   $object = new #[ExampleAttribute] class () {};

   $f1 = #[ExampleAttribute] function () {};

   $f2 = #[ExampleAttribute] fn() => 1;

Discussion
----------

Why was the "@:" syntax rejected?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

One argument against it was that it is more prone to accidental typos
like ``@;``. Another reason that some people disliked it is that it's
non-symmetrical, and thus doesn't fit well with existing PHP tokens. The
``@@`` syntax avoids both of these issues.

Will the "@" character make attributes hard to read?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It has been suggested that the ``@`` character could run into other wide
characters like ``M``, making attributes starting with that letter
harder to read. However, in practice this hasn't been an issue for the
many other languages that use the ``@Attr`` syntax. This concern is
largely dependent on font choice and syntax highlighting.

Will the lack of a closing >> delineator make inline attributes less readable?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There was a concern that it could be harder to tell where an inline
attribute ends without a closing ``>>`` token. However, for inline class
and function attributes, the ``class``/``function`` keyword already
provides a clear delineator.

For parameter attributes, this ends up being a bit subjective. Some see
``>>`` as clearly marking the end of an attribute, while others find
that the ``>>`` looks like a shift operator at first glance which makes
the syntax harder to read:

.. code:: php

   function foo(
       <<MyAttr([1, 2])>> Type $myParam,
   ) {}

   // vs.

   function foo(
       @@MyAttr([1, 2]) Type $myParam,
   ) {}

   // vs.

   function foo(
       #[MyAttr([1, 2])] Type $myParam,
   ) {}

Why not use a keyword instead?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It has been suggested that a keyword be used instead of a symbol. E.g.

.. code:: php

   attribute Foo();
   function myFunc() {}

However, the objective of this proposal is to arrive at a syntax that is
less verbose and aligns better with the attribute syntax used in other
common languages. Using a keyword doesn't meet either of these goals.

Isn't the syntax choice just something subjective we'll get used to?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To some extent this may be true. However, in this case we believe there
are also objective shortcomings with using ``<<>>`` for attributes,
which we have the opportunity to solve with a shorter syntax.

Comparison to Other Languages
-----------------------------

Most other languages with attributes use a variant of ``[Attr]`` or
``@Attr`` for the syntax. Hack is the only language using ``<<Attr>>``,
but apparently they are migrating away from this to ``@Attr`` now that
compatibility with PHP is no longer a goal.

-  C#: ``[Attr]``
   `1 <https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/programming-guide/concepts/attributes/>`__
-  C++: ``[[attr]]``
   `2 <https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/cpp/attributes?view=vs-2019>`__
-  Hack: ``<<Attr>>``
   `3 <https://docs.hhvm.com/hack/attributes/attribute-specification>`__
   (but migrating to ``@Attr``)
   `4 <https://github.com/facebook/hhvm/commit/a3f65737996e151ca2f25b3a335b89ef665c75cd>`__
-  Java: ``@Attr`` `5 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_annotation>`__
-  Kotlin: ``@Attr``
   `6 <https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/annotations.html>`__
-  Python: ``@attr`` `7 <https://pythonbasics.org/decorators/>`__
-  Rust: ``#[attr]``
   `8 <https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/attributes.html>`__
-  Swift: ``@attr``
   `9 <https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/ReferenceManual/Attributes.html>`__
-  TypeScript/JS: ``@Attr``
   `10 <https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/decorators.html>`__

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

In theory there is a small BC break for the ``@@`` syntax, since
multiple error suppression operators can currently be added with no
additional effect (e.g. ``@@@@@really_suppress_me()``). However, this
isn't useful for anything and is very unlikely to be used anywhere.

The alternate ``#[]`` syntax presents a larger backwards compatibility
break, since it would no longer be possible to begin a hash style
comment with a left bracket:

.. code:: php

   #[x] code like this would break
   $val = ['new value']; #['old value'];

While duplicate error suppression operators aren't useful, there is a
use for comments starting with a left bracket (e.g. making checkboxes or
commenting out an array). There is definitely code in the wild like this
that would break.
`11 <https://grep.app/search?q=%23%5B&filter[lang][0]=PHP>`__

Unaffected Functionality
------------------------

Attributes can still be applied to all the same places outlined in the
`Attributes v2 <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/attributes_v2>`__ RFC.
Non-syntactical attribute functionality also remains unchanged (e.g. the
reflection API).

Finally, this proposal does not conflict with the `Attribute
Amendments <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/attribute_amendments>`__ RFC, with
the exception that if the ``@@`` syntax is accepted, it will supersede
the syntax for grouped attributes.

Community Poll
--------------

On June 10-13 there was a poll on Reddit to see which syntax the
community prefers.
`12 <https://www.reddit.com/r/PHP/comments/h06bra/community_poll_attribute_syntax/>`__

``@@`` was the most popular, with 436 votes. ``<<>>`` came in second
place, with 240 votes. ``#[]`` came in third place, with 159 votes.

Vote
----

Voting started on 2020-06-17 and ended on 2020-07-01.

Primary vote
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: Are you okay with re-voting on the attribute syntax for PHP 8.0?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Secondary vote
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This is a ranked-choice poll (following
`STV <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_transferable_vote#Example>`__)
between the ``@@``, ``#[]``, and ``<<>>`` syntax alternatives. You can
vote **three** times, but make sure you select each syntax only once.

First choice
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Question: Attribute syntax choice #1
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-1:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  @@
-  #[]
-  <<>>

Second choice
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Question: Attribute syntax choice #2
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-2:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  @@
-  #[]
-  <<>>

Third choice
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Question: Attribute syntax choice #3
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-3:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  @@
-  #[]
-  <<>>

References
----------

-  Previous discussion about nested attributes:
   https://externals.io/message/108907#109623 and
   https://externals.io/message/108907#109688
-  Previous comments in favor of ``@@``:
   https://externals.io/message/109713#109742

Changelog
---------

-  2020-06-09 - Added ``#[Attr]`` syntax alternative with ranked-choice
   vote.
-  2020-06-16 - Summarized community poll and moved alternative syntax
   proposal before discussion section.

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Discussion: https://externals.io/message/110355
:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/5796
:Original Authors: Theodore Brown theodorejb@outlook.com, Martin Schröder
:Original PHP Version: PHP 8.0
:Slug: shorter_attribute_syntax
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/shorter_attribute_syntax
