Change Terminology To ExcludeList
=================================

:PHP-RFC: 0739
:Title: Change Terminology To ExcludeList
:Author: Michał Marcin Brzuchalski <brzuchal@php.net>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2020-06-09
:PHP-Version: 8.0
:Version: 0.9

Change the use of "blacklist" in Opcache configuration with better
self-descriptive terminology.

Introduction
------------

The word "blacklist" require additional context to figure out the exact
intention of a specific configuration. This proposal suggest to change
this to a name that better reflects what the functionality does.

Proposal
--------

The proposal is to replace all occurrences of "blacklist" to the
alternative "exclude_list".

A list of Open Source projects with similar terminology change is listed
in
`references <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/change-terminology-to-allowlist-and-blocklist#references>`__
section. There is also a draft `IETF
document <https://tools.ietf.org/id/draft-knodel-terminology-00.html>`__.

Change INI directive name
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A new INI directive called ``opcache.exclude_list_filename`` will be
introduced and will configure the same internal value as the already
existing ``opcache.blacklist_filename``.

The INI directive called ``opcache.blacklist_filename`` will remain as
is but with additional soft-deprecation in the docs and in
``php.ini-development`` and ``php.ini-production``.

Change in opcache_get_configuration function
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``opcache_get_configuration()`` function currently returns an
associative array with information about Opcache. A new key named
``exclude_list`` will be added to resulting array with the same value as
the original ``blacklist`` key which will remain untouched with
additional soft-deprecation in the docs.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

Most of the changes are internal only with two exceptions for which this
patch requires RFC:

#. The new ``opcache.exclude_list_filename`` INI directive
#. An extra ``exclude_list`` key in the returned array value of
   ``opcache_get_configuration()``

Whether the use of the ``opcache.blacklist_filename`` INI directive
triggers a deprecation notice is a subject to a secondary vote.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

Next PHP version 8.0.

RFC Impact
----------

To SAPIs
~~~~~~~~

None.

To Existing Extensions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Only in Opcache.

To Opcache
~~~~~~~~~~

This proposal modifies Opcache structure and function names by replacing
"blacklist" with "exclude_list".

php.ini Defaults
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  php.ini-development changed name of ``opcache.blacklist_filename``
   into ``opcache.exclude_list_filename``
-  php.ini-production changed name of ``opcache.blacklist_filename``
   into ``opcache.exclude__filename``

Future scope
------------

The possibility to remove ``opcache.blacklist_filename`` INI directive
and ``opcache_get_configuration()["exclude_list"]`` in the next minor
PHP version: 8.1.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

Accept changing terminology in PHP 8.0? Yes/No with 2/3 majority
required. Add deprecation notice when deprecated INI directive used?
Yes/No

Implementation
--------------

#. https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/5685

References
----------

#. `PHPUnit <https://github.com/sebastianbergmann/phpunit/blob/master/ChangeLog-9.3.md#930---2020-08-07>`__
#. `Xdebug <https://github.com/xdebug/xdebug/commit/63b43b51e43b794cf8cd740e54089b2b7320fbe1>`__
#. `Drupal <https://www.drupal.org/project/drupal/issues/2993575>`__
#. `Gitlab <https://gitlab.com/gitlab-org/gitlab/-/issues/7554>`__
#. `GoLang <https://go-review.googlesource.com/c/go/+/236857/>`__
#. `RoR <https://github.com/rails/rails/issues/33677>`__
#. `Ruby Static
   Analyser <https://github.com/rubocop-hq/rubocop/pull/7469>`__

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Michał Marcin Brzuchalski brzuchal@php.net
:Original PHP Version: PHP 8.0
:Original Status: Under Discussion
:Slug: change-terminology-to-excludelist
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/change-terminology-to-excludelist
