Allow Void Return Type On Constructors/destructors
==================================================

:PHP-RFC: 0742
:Title: Allow Void Return Type On Constructors/destructors
:Author: Benas Seliuginas <benas.molis.iml@gmail.com>
:Status: Withdrawn
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2020-06-16
:PHP-Version: 8.0
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

This RFC proposes to allow specifying void return type on constructors
and destructors. In a way, this optional return type is like a trailing
comma: some might use it, some might not, but both cases are valid and
allowed.

Note, the following RFC suggests to allow specifying an **OPTIONAL**
``void`` return type. It's more or less just a cosmetic addition and by
no means is mandatory. If you prefer no return type, that is completely
legal.

Proposal
--------

The introduction sums up the entire proposal therefore I provided a few
arguments and thoughts of mine, as to why we should allow this
"alternative code style".

Explicit declaration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Since a fix for bug #79679 `is being worked
on <https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/5678>`__, soon it will be
illegal to return anything from the constructor (even though no return
type means ``mixed|void``).

.. code:: php

   <?php
   class Test {
       public function __construct() {}
   }

   class Test2 extends Test {
       public function __construct() {
           // WTF? Why isn't this legal?
           // No return type means mixed|void
           // Right? So this should work?
           $test = parent::__construct();
       }
   }

In order to signal that the function does not return any value, we
should be able (but not forced) to explicitly declare the ``void``
return type. As per the Zen of Python, explicit is always better than
implicit.

Thus, this RFC suggests allowing to do so:

.. code:: php

   <?php
   class Test {
       public function __construct(): void {}
   }

   class Test2 extends Test {
       public function __construct(): void {
           // We explicitly state that the
           // parent constructor does not
           // return. Makes more sense now.
           $test = parent::__construct();
       }
   }

Moreover, it's important to remember that the constructor is rather a
regular function that can be called just like any other method (i.e.
``$object->__construct();``).

Documented as void
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the PHP manual, both constructor and destructor are specified to have
``void`` return type (e. g.
`here <https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.oop5.decon.php>`__).

\__clone allows void return type
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Given that the `magic methods' signature
validation <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/magic-methods-signature>`__ RFC is
going to pass, we will be able to declare ``__clone`` return type as
``void``. Some had said, that the constructor "implicitly"/"indirectly"
returns a new object. But:

.. code:: php

   ​<?php​
   ​.​.​.​

   ​$​object​ = ​new​ ​Test​();
   ​// Also "indirectly" returns a cloned object
   ​// and works similarly to a constructor but
   // will indeed allow the void return type.
   ​$​object_2​ = clone ​$​object​;

Consistency with other methods
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Basically, all (both regular and magic) methods allow to have an
explicit return type. The only exceptions are constructors and
destructors.

As `Kalle has pointed
out <https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/5717#issuecomment-644419488>`__,
it is a finger habbit to type a return type after every method and could
see himself write this as a style.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

None.

It is allowed to not a specify a return type. Although, since no return
type means ``mixed|void``, it is not legal to "narrow" the return type
to ``mixed`` (using covariance), only ``void``.

Vote
----

2/3 majority Yes/No.

Implementation
--------------

`GitHub Pull Request <https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/5717>`__

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Benas Seliuginas, benas.molis.iml@gmail.com
:Original PHP Version: PHP 8.0
:Original Status: Superseded by `make_ctor_ret_void <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/make_ctor_ret_void>`__
:Slug: constructor_return_type
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/constructor_return_type
