Allow Trailing Comma In Closure Use Lists
=========================================

:PHP-RFC: 0749
:Title: Allow Trailing Comma In Closure Use Lists
:Author: Tyson Andre <tandre@php.net>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2020-07-01
:PHP-Version: 8.0
:Version: 0.2

Introduction
------------

This RFC proposes to allow an optional trailing comma in closure use
lists. This is already supported for argument and parameter lists.

Consider this example:

.. code:: php

   $longArgs_longVars = function (
       $longArgument,
       $longerArgument,
       $muchLongerArgument,  // Trailing commas were allowed in parameter lists in PHP 8.0
   ) use (
       $longVar1,
       $longerVar2,
       $muchLongerVar3
   ) {
      // body
   };
   $longArgs_longVars(
       $longArgumentValue,
       $obj->longMethodCall(),
       $obj->longPropertyName ?? $longDefault,
   );

This closure declaration has too many parameters and closure use
variables to place all of them on one line, at least under conventional
coding standards. In such cases
`PSR-12 <https://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-12/#7-closures>`__ recommends
using the formatting above instead (PSR-12 predates support for trailing
commas in parameter lists).

Unfortunately, it is currently not possible to place a trailing comma in
the closure use list. This breaks uniformity, and results in larger
diffs when a new optional closure use variable is added. Additionally,
it is inconsistent with parameter lists and call-sites, which **do**
allow a trailing comma.

At this point, I'm used to *always* adding a trailing comma to
multi-line lists, regardless of what kind of element they contain. We
should avoid having this kind of arbitrary restriction.

Proposal
--------

Allow a single optional trailing comma in closure use lists.

Prior Art
---------

`Allow trailing comma in parameter
list </rfc/trailing_comma_in_parameter_list>`__ added support for
trailing commas in parameter lists.

`Allow a trailing comma in function
calls </rfc/trailing-comma-function-calls>`__ added support for trailing
commas in calls.

`Trailing Commas In List Syntax </rfc/list-syntax-trailing-commas>`__
was a previous proposal to support optional trailing commas in all
list-like structures.

Nothing has substantially changed since those RFCs in technical terms,
but I think the aforementioned style for breaking up large lists has
become more accepted in the meantime.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

None.

Vote
----

Yes/No, requiring 2/3 majority.

Voting starts 2020-07-15 and ends 2020-07-29.

Question: Allow trailing comma in closure use lists
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Changelog
---------

0.2: Fix implementation link.

Discussion
----------

https://externals.io/message/110715 "Permitting trailing commas in
closure use() declarations"

https://externals.io/message/110804 "[RFC] Allow trailing comma in
closure use list"

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/5793
:Original Authors: Tyson Andre tandre@php.net
:Original PHP Version: PHP 8.0
:Slug: trailing_comma_in_closure_use_list
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/trailing_comma_in_closure_use_list
