Objects Can Be Declared Falsifiable
===================================

:PHP-RFC: 0754
:Title: Objects Can Be Declared Falsifiable
:Author: Josh Bruce <josh@joshbruce.dev>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2020-07-16
:Version: 0.92

Introduction
------------

This RFC introduces a new interface ``Falsifiable`` and magic method
``__toBool()`` allowing custom objects (types) to define and declare
themselves ``true`` or ``false``. Given PHP 8 interprets a valid
instance as only ``true``, this would give developers (the instance
itself, and other objects) the opportunity to work with an instance of a
known object (type) and glean its truthiness from the instance itself,
not ``null`` or ``empty()`` checks. (Or ``strlen()`` and other
operator-required checks.)

This RFC has 3 goals:

#. provide a way for an instantiated object to be interpreted as
   ``false``, without ``null`` while being consistent with similar
   approaches as of PHP 8,
#. provide a new ``Falsifiable`` functional interface and ``__toBool()``
   method, which allows for direct conversion of the object by way of
   casting to ``bool`` or passing to ``empty()``, and
#. no BC breaks (no polyfill is planned at this time).

Goal 1: All PHP scalar types have a ``true`` and ``false``
representation. One of the three compound types (``array``) has a
``true`` and ``false`` representation. The other two compound types
(``callable`` and ``object``) only have a ``true`` representation but no
``false`` representation. As such, developers tend to resort to using
``null`` assigned to variables or returned from function and method
calls to represent non-objects; however, this is an inaccurate
representation as the object cannot be interacted with as that type of
object. Further, ``null`` itself is a special type separate from the
scalar and compound types. (See Truthiness tables section.)

Language features have been added and are proposed to address or
workaround this use of ``null``, namely nullable types (optionals) and
the proposed nullsafe operator, both of which add syntax while
addressing interaction with ``null`` causing a fatal error.

This RFC seeks to add another layer. The ability to have a live instance
(not ``null``) that can still represent ``false`` and be interacted with
as an instance of that object (type).

Goal 2: To maintain consistency and feel within PHP, this RFC follows
the ``Countable`` and ``Stringable`` interfaces and implementations. For
type safety, implementers can explicitly declare the ``Falsifiable``
interface in their class declarations. Further, the union type
``bool|Falsifiable`` will be dynamically added at run time to any object
implementing the reserved ``__toBool()`` method, which would allow
``stdClass()`` objects to be defined as ``Falsifiable`` also.

The interface stub.

.. code:: php

   interface Falsifiable
   {
     public function __toBool(): bool;
   }

Unlike ``Stringable`` we can explicitly declare (force) the return type
(``bool``).

A ``__toBool()`` magic method was selected to maintain consistency with
PHP 8. ``__toString()`` allows developers to specify a string
representation of the object (with the ``Stringable`` interface for type
safety). There is an RFC to do similar with ``array`` using a
``__toArray()`` magic method. Converting to an ``array`` can also be
done by way of the ``__serialize()`` magic method, but requires the
object be passed to the ``serialize()`` and ``unserialize()`` functions
from the standard library. The signature for ``__serialize()`` in PHP 8
indicates the return type is being changed to an ``array`` not a
``string``, but still requires being passed to the ``serialize()`` and
``unserialize()`` functions. Therefore, there seems to be a precedent
for using magic methods when declaring base type representations of
custom objects (types).

Goal 3: BC breaks should be minimal, if at all:

#. PHP language guidance reserves methods beginning with two underscores
   for language features. (Including ``__construct()`` replacing old
   style constructors in PHP 7.)
#. The interface would be in the root PHP namespace; therefore, should
   not collide with other implementations and, if so, can be modified
   with ``as``.
#. The implementation does not replace, or interfere with the
   interactions of ``null`` types; therefore, nullable types and the
   possibility of nullsafe operators can work as expected.

Proposal
--------

As-is using a mixed type array:

.. code:: php

   $array = [
     new stdClass(),
     [1, 2, 3],
     "",
     "Hello",
     [],
     new ClassWithToBoolReturningFalse()
   ];

   $filtered = array_filter($array, function($item) { return (bool) $item });

   // output:
   // [
   //   stdClass(),
   //   [1, 2, 3],
   //   "Hello",
   //   ClassWithToBoolReturningFalse()
   // ];

   $filtered = array_filter($array, function($item) { return empty($item) });

   // output:
   // [
   //   "",
   //   []
   // ];

To-be with ``Falsifiable`` interface and magic method:

.. code:: php

   $array = [
     new stdClass(),
     [1, 2, 3],
     "",
     "Hello",
     [],
     new ClassWithToBoolReturningFalse()
   ];

   $filtered = array_filter($array, function($item) { return (bool) $item });

   // output:
   // [
   //   stdClass(),
   //   [1, 2, 3],
   //   "Hello"
   // ];

   $filtered = array_filter($array, function($item) { return empty($item) });

   // output:
   // [
   //   "",
   //   [],
   //   ClassWithToBoolReturningFalse()
   // ];

To get the same output from the "To-be" sample, without the
``Falsifiable`` interface being interpreted automatically from PHP
(removing the double underscore to reduce unneeded syntax).

.. code:: php

   $array = [
     new stdClass(),
     [1, 2, 3],
     "",
     "Hello",
     [],
     new ClassWithIsEmptyReturningFalse()
   ];

   $filtered = array_filter($array, function($item) { 
     return (is_object($item) and $item instanceof Falsifiable)
       ? $item->toBool()
       : (bool) $item;
   });

   // output:
   // [
   //   stdClass(),
   //   [1, 2, 3],
   //   "Hello"
   // ];

   $filtered = array_filter($array, function($item) { 
     return (is_object($item) and $item instanceof Falsifiable)
       ? ! $item->toBool()
       : empty($item);
   });

   // output:
   // [
   //   "",
   //   [],
   //   ClassWithToBoolReturningFalse()
   // ];

Type juggling tables
--------------------

With no modifications or interventions by the developer and all types
are empty (or false in the case of boolean):

+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| Cast  | Type: |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| to    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+
|       | null  | c     | o     | array | float | in    | s     | bool  |
|       | (u    | ustom | bject |       |       | teger | tring | (ean) |
|       | nset) | type  |       |       |       |       |       |       |
|       |       | (e    |       |       |       |       |       |       |
|       |       | mpty) |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| unset | null  | null  | null  | null  | null  | null  | null  | null  |
| (nul  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| lify) |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| c     | error | error | error | error | error | error | error | error |
| ustom |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| type  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| o     | o     | no    | no    | o     | o     | o     | o     | o     |
| bject | bject | c     | c     | bject | bject | bject | bject | bject |
|       | (e    | hange | hange |       | (s    | (s    | (s    | (s    |
|       | mpty) |       |       |       | calar | calar | calar | calar |
|       |       |       |       |       | of 0) | of 0) | of    | of    |
|       |       |       |       |       |       |       | "")   | f     |
|       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       | alse) |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| array | []    | []    | []    | no    | [0]   | [0]   | [""]  | [f    |
|       |       |       |       | c     |       |       |       | alse] |
|       |       |       |       | hange |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| float | 0     | error | error | 0     | no    | 0     | 0     | 0     |
|       |       |       |       |       | c     |       |       |       |
|       |       |       |       |       | hange |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| in    | 0     | error | error | 0     | 0     | no    | 0     | 0     |
| teger |       |       |       |       |       | c     |       |       |
|       |       |       |       |       |       | hange |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| s     | ""    | error | s     | error | "0"   | "0"   | no    | ""    |
| tring |       |       | tring |       |       |       | c     |       |
|       |       |       |       |       |       |       | hange |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| bo    | false | true  | true  | false | false | false | false | no    |
| olean |       |       |       |       |       |       |       | c     |
|       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       | hange |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+

Truthiness tables
-----------------

Scalar types and their relationship to ``false``:

+---------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
| Type    | V            | Result from  | Result from  | Result from  |
|         | alue/Context | (bool) cast  | empty()      | conditional  |
|         |              |              |              | if ({value}) |
|         |              |              |              | {}           |
+=========+==============+==============+==============+==============+
| string  | "Hello"      | true         | false        | true -       |
|         |              |              |              | inside       |
|         |              |              |              | braces       |
+---------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
| integer | >= 1         | true         | false        | true         |
+---------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
| integer | <= -1        | true         | false        | true         |
+---------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
| float   | > 0          | true         | false        | true         |
+---------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
| float   | < 0          | true         | false        | true         |
+---------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
| string  | ""           | false        | true         | false -      |
|         |              |              |              | outside      |
|         |              |              |              | braces       |
+---------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
| integer | 0            | false        | true         | false        |
+---------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
| float   | 0.0          | false        | true         | false        |
+---------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+

Compound types (no pseudo-types) and their relationship to ``false``:

+----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Type     | Va          | Result from | Result from | Result from |
|          | lue/Context | (bool) cast | empty()     | conditional |
|          |             |             |             | if          |
|          |             |             |             | ({value})   |
|          |             |             |             | {}          |
+==========+=============+=============+=============+=============+
| array    | [1, 2, 3]   | true        | false       | true        |
+----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| callable | function()  | true        | false       | true        |
|          | {}          |             |             |             |
+----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| object   | new         | true        | false       | true        |
|          | stdClass()  |             |             |             |
+----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| array    | []          | false       | true        | false       |
+----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

``null`` and its relationship to ``false``:

+------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
| Type | V            | Result from  | Result from  | Result from  |
|      | alue/Context | (bool) cast  | empty()      | conditional  |
|      |              |              |              | if ({value}) |
|      |              |              |              | {}           |
+======+==============+==============+==============+==============+
| NULL | --           | false        | true         | false        |
+------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+

Outliers (beyond the scope of this RFC):

+--------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
| Type   | V            | Result from  | Result from  | Result from  |
|        | alue/Context | (bool) cast  | empty()      | conditional  |
|        |              |              |              | if ({value}) |
|        |              |              |              | {}           |
+========+==============+==============+==============+==============+
| string | "0"          | false        | true         | false        |
+--------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+

Row 1: Even though the string contains a character, it is considered
``false`` and ``empty`` as it appears the value is passed through
``intval()``, which results in zero and is automatically inerpeted as
``false`` and ``empty`` as of PHP 8.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

No known incompatibles.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

PHP 8.1 or later

RFC Impact
----------

No known negative impacts.

Open Issues
-----------

July 16, 2020
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-   Default value for parameters with a class type can only be NULL

July 15, 2020
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  How type safe is this really? (desire is to increase type safety -
   partially by being able to return a single type from a method that
   resolves to false)
-  Impact to static analysis. Multiple static analyzers for PHP exist:
   Phan (Rasmus and Morrison), PHPStan (Mirtes), Psalm (Vimeo), and a
   general list - https://github.com/exakat/php-static-analysis-tools
-  Interaction with equality operators.
-  Language around ``bool|Falsifiable`` implementation and need.
-  What version of PHP switched to only allowing ``__construct()``

.. _july-15-2020-1:

< July 15, 2020
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Presumes impact similar to ``__toString()`` and ``Stringable``. RFC
   for ``Stringable`` listed concerns related to ``__toString()``
   already being a method. Would look at the implementation as it should
   be similar, level of knowledge to implement is not there yet.
-  As of this writing I do not have the knowledge, practice, and
   practical understanding of implementing within PHP internals to
   implement this myself. If you're interested in (helping) implement
   this concept, please do reach out (help may be in the form guidance
   and instruction or full implementation, up to you).

Unaffected PHP Functionality
----------------------------

-  ``null`` behavior remains unchanged.
-  Object can define other methods that return ``bool`` including one
   named ``toBool()``.

Future Scope
------------

Leaves open, and does not directly pursue, the possibility of a future
emptiness check or return. If passed to ``empty()`` a false instance
would be considered empty; however, there may come a future in PHP
wherein developers could specify the "emptiness" of an instance.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

yes/no

Patches and Tests
-----------------

Links to any external patches and tests go here.

If there is no patch, make it clear who will create a patch, or whether
a volunteer to help with implementation is needed.

Make it clear if the patch is intended to be the final patch, or is just
a prototype.

For changes affecting the core language, you should also provide a patch
for the language specification.

Implementation
--------------

Temporary PR for implementation, with status notes:
https://github.com/joshbruce/php-src/pull/1

After the project is implemented, this section should contain

-  the version(s) it was merged into
-  a link to the git commit(s)
-  a link to the PHP manual entry for the feature
-  a link to the language specification section (if any)

References
----------

These RFCs are identified as similar in spirit to this [concept],
possibly helped by this [concept], or this [concept] is potentially
helped by the result of the linked RFC.

Originally posted on GitHub, edit history available there:
`0.2.0 <https://bit.ly/php-0002>`__ and
`0.1.0 <https://bit.ly/php-0001>`__

Implemented:

-  `PHP RFC: Union Types
   2.0 <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/union_types_v2>`__ - accept multiple
   types, including ``null``
-  `PHP RFC: Counting of non-countable
   objects <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/counting_non_countables>`__ -
   return ``1`` or ``0``, not ``null``.

Accepted:

-  `PHP RFC: Nullable Types <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/nullable_types>`__
   - return ``null`` or one (or more) types from function or method
-  `PHP RFC: Add Stringable
   interface <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/stringable>`__ - implementation
   reference, automatically view object as string
-  `PHP RFC: Ensure correct signatures of magic
   methods <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/magic-methods-signature>`__ -
   implementation reference

Under review and discussion:

-  `PHP RFC: Nullsafe
   operator <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/nullsafe_operator>`__ - chained
   method calls do not halt when encountering ``null``
-  `PHP RFC: Pipe Operator
   v2 <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/pipe-operator-v2>`__ - chain using
   object instance using ``__invoke()``
-  `PHP RFC:__toArray() <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/to-array>`__ -
   implementation reference and where magic method should live

Declined:

-  `PHP RFC: Userspace operator
   overloading <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/userspace_operator_overloading>`__
   - could facilitate ``__toBool()`` by proxy via operators

Other:

-  `Official thread <https://externals.io/message/111009>`__
-  `Mention of type juggling tables being
   added <https://externals.io/message/111076>`__ - started as new
   thread
-  `Declaring emptiness <https://externals.io/message/110967>`__ - alt
   thread that was still exploring ideas for this RFC
-  `Instance as boolean <https://externals.io/message/110881>`__ -
   original thread related to this RFC
-  `\__toBoolean() brief
   discussion <https://externals.io/message/39323#39331>`__ 11 years ago

Rejected Features
-----------------

Keep this updated with features that were discussed on the mail lists.

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementer: seeking (or someone willing to answer specific questions when I have them)
:Original Authors: Josh Bruce, josh@joshbruce.dev
:Original Status: Under discussion
:Slug: objects-can-be-falsifiable
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/objects-can-be-falsifiable
