PHP\iterable\any() And All() On Iterables
=========================================

:PHP-RFC: 0757
:Title: PHP\iterable\any() And All() On Iterables
:Author: Tyson Andre <tandre@php.net>
:Status: Declined
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2020-08-30
:Version: 0.6

Introduction
------------

The primitives ``any()`` and ``all()`` are a common part of many
programming languages and help in avoiding verbosity or unnecessary
abstractions.

#. Haskell:
   https://hackage.haskell.org/package/base-4.14.0.0/docs/Prelude.html#v:any
#. JavaScript:
   https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/some
#. Python: https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html#all
#. Ruby: https://apidock.com/ruby/Enumerable/any%3F
#. Java 8(Stream):
   https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/stream/Stream.html#allMatch-java.util.function.Predicate-
#. C++: https://www.cplusplus.com/reference/algorithm/any_of/

For example, the following code could be shortened significantly:

.. code:: php

   // The old version
   $satisifies_predicate = false;
   foreach ($item_list as $item) {
       // Performs DB operations or external service requests, stops on first match by design.
       if (API::satisfiesCondition($item)) {
           $satisfies_predicate = true;
           break;
       }
   }
   if (!$satisfies_predicate) {
       throw new APIException("No matches found");
   }
   // more code....

.. code:: php

   // The new version is much shorter, readable, and easier to review,
   // without creating temporary variables or helper functions that are used in only one place.

   // Performs DB operations or external service requests, stops on first match by design.
   if (!\PHP\iterable\any($item_list, fn($item) => API::satisfiesCondition($item))) {
       throw new APIException("No matches found");
   }

Proposal
--------

Add the functions
``PHP\iterable\any(iterable $input, ?callable $callback = null): bool``
and ``all(...)`` to PHP's standard library's function set. (The
namespace ``PHP\iterable`` was preferred in `a straw poll that was
previously sent
out </rfc/any_all_on_iterable_straw_poll_namespace#vote>`__)

**The implementation is equivalent to the following polyfill:**

.. code:: php

   namespace PHP\iterable;

   /**
    * Determines whether any element of the iterable satisfies the predicate.
    *
    *
    * If the value returned by the callback is truthy
    * (e.g. true, non-zero number, non-empty array, truthy object, etc.),
    * this is treated as satisfying the predicate.
    *
    * @param iterable $input
    * @param null|callable(mixed):mixed $callback
    */
   function any(iterable $input, ?callable $callback = null): bool {
       foreach ($input as $v) {
           if ($callback !== null ? $callback($v) : $v) {
               return true;
           }
       }
       return false;
   }

.. code:: php

   /**
    * Determines whether all elements of the iterable satisfy the predicate.
    *
    * If the value returned by the callback is truthy
    * (e.g. true, non-zero number, non-empty array, truthy object, etc.),
    * this is treated as satisfying the predicate.
    *
    * @param iterable $input
    * @param null|callable(mixed):mixed $callback
    */
   function all(iterable $input, ?callable $callback = null): bool {
       foreach ($input as $v) {
           if (!($callback !== null ? $callback($v) : $v)) {
               return false;
           }
       }
       return true;
   }

This proposal recommends adding ``PHP\iterable\any()`` and
``PHP\iterable\all()`` to the standard library instead of a PECL or
composer library for the following reasons

#. New contributors to projects wouldn't know about ``any()`` and
   ``all()`` if those functions were reimplemented in various composer
   libraries or util.php files with different semantics/names and only
   occasionally used.
#. If this was provided only in userland, there'd be low adoption and
   code such as the above example (API::somePredicate()) would remain
   common.
#. If the standard library provided it, then polyfills for newer php
   functionality could adopt this as well, making cleaner code easier to
   write.

Implementation Details
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When ``any()`` or ``all()`` are called with an iterable and a predicate,
it internally checks if the value returned by the predicate is truthy
(e.g. true, non-zero numbers, non-empty arrays, truthy objects, etc.)

When ``any()`` or ``all()`` are called with only an iterable, it is
equivalent to checking if any/all of the arguments are truthy. This is
equivalent to calling ``any()``/``all()`` with ``fn ($x) => $x``, which
is equivalent to calling it with ``fn($x) => (bool)$x``.

.. code:: php

   php > var_export(PHP\iterable\any([false]));
   false
   php > var_export(PHP\iterable\any([true]));
   true
   php > var_export(PHP\iterable\any([0]));
   false
   php > var_export(PHP\iterable\any([1]));
   true
   php > var_export(PHP\iterable\any([0], fn($x) => $x));
   false
   php > var_export(PHP\iterable\any([1], fn($x) => $x));
   true

   php > var_export(PHP\iterable\all([true, true, true], fn($x) => $x));
   true
   php > var_export(PHP\iterable\all([1, 2, 3], fn($x) => $x));
   true
   php > var_export(PHP\iterable\all([true, true, false], fn($x) => $x));
   false
   php > var_export(PHP\iterable\all([1, 2, 0], fn($x) => $x));
   false
   php > var_export(PHP\iterable\all([1, 2, 0]);
   false

Secondary Vote: any()/all() or any_value()/all_values()
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A secondary vote will be held on whether to name this
``any()``/``all()`` or ``any_value()``/``all_values()``

PHP is unique in that the primitive array-like type ``array`` type is
also a dictionary, making the keys often significant (strings, numeric
identifiers, etc). Existing function names vary in whether the fact that
they only act on values is explicitly included in the name.

Many other programming languages have gone with a short name for the
default of checking if a value is in a collection.

    The primitives ``any()`` and ``all()`` are a common part of many
    programming languages and help in avoiding verbosity or unnecessary
    abstractions.

    #. Haskell:   
    https://hackage.haskell.org/package/base-4.14.0.0/docs/Prelude.html#v:any
    #. JavaScript:   
    https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/some
    #. Python: https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html#all #.
    Ruby: https://apidock.com/ruby/Enumerable/any%3F #. Java 8(Stream): 
     
    https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/stream/Stream.html#allMatch-java.util.function.Predicate-
    #. C++: https://www.cplusplus.com/reference/algorithm/any_of/

Benefits of a shorter name:

#. Conciseness for the most common use case of checking whether a
   predicate is true for any/all values of an iterable array/object.
#. Consistency with some other functions such as ``array_reduce()``,
   ``array_unique()``, ``in_array()``, ``next()`` that use values for
   their underlying implementation (i.e. not being named
   ``array_reduce_values()``, ``next_value()``, etc.)
#. Potential to use $flags to extend this to support less common use
   cases like ``ARRAY_FILTER_USE_KEY``/``ARRAY_FILTER_USE_BOTH`` without
   adding more global functions

Benefits of a longer name:

#. A longer name would be more descriptive and make it easier to
   understand what code is doing.
#. This makes it likely that in the future for iterable functionality,
   PHP will add multiple functions such as ``any_key()``/(``any_entry``
   or ``any_key_value``) instead of using $flags (which will be simpler
   to statically analyze or infer types for - in rare cases the argument
   $flags passed to ``array_filter($values, $callback, $flags)`` is an
   unknown dynamic value).
   Adding a constant such as ``flags: PHP\iterable\USE_KEY`` may make
   the code longer.
   Note that adding the name ``any()`` for values of iterables doesn't
   prevent PHP from adding ``any_key()`` for checking keys of iterables
   in the future, either (my personal preference would be to add
   ``any_key()`` regardless of whether ``any()``/``any_value()`` was
   added).

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

Any userland functions called ``PHP\iterable\any()`` and
``PHP\iterable\all()`` in the global namespace without a
``!function_exists()`` check would encounter duplicate function errors.
Because the `PHP namespace is reserved for internal use by
PHP <https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.namespaces.rationale.php>`__,
this is unlikely.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

8.1

Future Scope
------------

Add int $flag = 0?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Similar to array_filter, ``int $flag = 0`` could be used to control
which parameters get passed to the predicate such as
``ARRAY_FILTER_USE_BOTH`` and ``ARRAY_FILTER_USE_KEY``.

Because there was discussion of whether the ability to pass keys was
widely useful and multiple approaches that could be used to pass the
iterable key, this functionality was left out of this RFC. See
https://externals.io/message/111711#111721

    I like this, but I do not like the flags. I don't think they're at
    all useful. A lot of the other discussion in the thread seems to be
    needlessly complicating it, too.

    all() and any() only need return booleans. Their callbacks only need
    return booleans. That's the point. first() makes sense to add, and
    it would return the first value that matches.

    For the callback itself, there is work to, hopefully, add partial
    function application to 8.1. (No idea if it will be successful, but
    the effort is in progress.) If so, the upshot is that turning an
    arbitrary function into a single-parameter function becomes silly
    easy, which means functions like this can just expect a single
    parameter callback and be done with it. No need for extra-args or
    flags or whatnot.

    If you want to check the keys of an array, call ``array_keys()``
    first and use that.

    ``if (any(array_keys($foo), fn($k) => $k %2)) { ... }``

    all(), any(), and first() all sound like good things to include, but
    let's not over-complicate them. We can do better today than we could
    in 1999...

    --Larry Garfield

Add first($iterable, $callback = null, $default = null): mixed as well?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

https://externals.io/message/111711#111732

    If it took the default value as well it could return that (to
    distinguish the absence of a result from null matching the
    predicate). While it's useful in itself it also would enable you to
    pass a marker object and check the identity of that to know if no
    matches have been found:

    .. code:: php

    $none = new stdClass;    $element = first($collection, fn($elt) =>
    ..., $none);    if ($element === $none) {        // nothing found   
    }

Calling it ``[iterable_]search_callback()`` or ``first_match[ing]()`` or
``find()`` might help distinguish this from the
``reset()``/``end()``/``next()``/``prev()`` family of global functions -
there's more than one possible name.

Discussion
----------

Alternative names
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``any_value()`` or ``all_values()`` have been suggested as alternative
names: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/6053#issuecomment-684164832

    I suggest slightly different signatures, assuming we stay
    value-oriented:

    .. code:: php

    // ...omitted

    // with named parameters    all_values(of: [1, 3, 5, 7], satisfy:
    'is_odd');    any_value(of: [0, 2, 4, 6], satisfies: 'is_prime');

    // without named parameters    all_values([1, 3, 5, 7], 'is_odd');  
     any_value([0, 2, 4, 6], 'is_prime');

    The naming clarifies what any and all are about--the values--and
    leaves room for naming functions that are key or key/value oriented.

``iter_any()`` or ``iterable_any()`` have also been suggested as
alternative names.

    The main thing I'm concerned about is that once we start extending
    this area (I assume that any & all are not going to be the last
    additions in this space) we will quickly run into function names
    that are either too generic or outright collide. For example, what
    if we want to add an iterator-based version of range()? Do we really
    want to be forced to pull a Python and call it xrange()? That's
    about as good as real_range()...

    As such, I think it's important to prefix these somehow, though I
    don't care strongly how. Could be iter_all() or iterable_all(). We
    might even make it iterator_all() if we also adjust other existing
    iterator_\* functions to accept iterables. I'd also be happy with
    iter\all() or iterable\all(), but that gets us back into namespacing
    discussions :)

Because ``any()`` and ``all()`` are potentially commonly used functions
in the same way as ``count(Countable|array)`` and always return
booleans, I preferred a short name over longer names. This also allows
potentially supporting ``int $flags = 0`` in the future, similar to what
was done for ``array_filter()``.

Initially, the proposal was to add this in the global scope as
``iterable_all()`` and ``iterable_any()``.

Add find_first() instead?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

    I was actually working on this sort of thing recently. Technically,
    you can support all, any, and first by using a single function:

    .. code:: php

    function find_first(iterable $of, callable($value, $key): bool
    $thatSatistifes): Iterator

    It converts the ``$iterable`` into an ``Iterator``, then calls the
    callback for each key/value pair until one returns true, and then
    always returns the iterator at the current position.

    This allows you to know both key and value when making a decision.
    By returning an iterator the caller can get both key and value. By
    returning an iterator it can handle both the empty case and not
    found cases with ``$result->valid() === false``. By returning an
    iterator it might be useful for processing the remainder of the list
    somehow. I'm not sure that in practice it would be that friendly,
    but it's worth pointing out for discussion at least.

Vote
----

Add
``PHP\iterable\any(iterable $input, ?callable $callback = null): bool``
and
``PHP\iterable\all(iterable $input, ?callable $callback = null): bool``
(yes/no, requiring a 2/3 majority)

Voting started on 2021-02-08 and ended on 2021-02-22.

Question: Add PHP\iterable\any() and all() to PHP?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

| 
| The following secondary vote will be used to decide between
  ``any()``/``all()`` and ``any_value()``/``all_values()`` as the name
  within the ``PHP\iterable`` namespace. See `the discussion section for
  the benefits/drawbacks of those
  names <#secondary_voteanyall_or_any_valueall_values>`__.

Question: Names to use: any()/all() or any_value()/all_values()
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-1:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  any()/all()
-  any_value()/all_values()

Straw Poll
~~~~~~~~~~

Question: Reasons for voting against this RFC
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-2:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Too small in scope
-  Object to the choice of namespace
-  Prefer the global namespace
-  Confused about the implementation
-  Prefer userland solutions
-  Other
-  Voted for this RFC

References
----------

#. https://externals.io/message/111711 "Proposal: Adding functions
   any(iterable $input, ?callable $cb = null, int $use_flags=0) and
   all(...)"
#. https://externals.io/message/103357 "[PATCH] Implementing
   array_every() and array_any()"
#. https://externals.io/message/111756 "[RFC] Global functions any() and
   all() on iterables"
#. `Straw poll: Naming for \*any() and \*all() on
   iterables </rfc/any_all_on_iterable_straw_poll>`__
#. `Straw poll: Using namespaces for \*any() and \*all() on
   iterables </rfc/any_all_on_iterable_straw_poll_namespace>`__ (older
   poll)
#. `RFC: Namespaces in bundled PHP
   extensions </rfc/namespaces_in_bundled_extensions>`__ (started after
   voting closed)
#. `Straw poll: Namespace to use for CachedIterable and iterable
   functionality </rfc/cachediterable_straw_poll>`__ (newer poll)

Rejected Features
-----------------

Adding flags like ```array_filter()`` <https://php.net/array_filter>`__
was left out of this RFC due to debate over how often it would be used
in practice and moved to future scope.

Changelog
---------

-  0.3: Add more quotes
-  0.4: Change name to ``PHP\iterable\all`` and ``PHP\iterable\any``,
   add a secondary vote on ``any/all`` vs ``any_value()/all_values()``
-  0.5: Add straw poll
-  0.6: Add examples of how this works, add in missing return type,
   clarify treatment of predicate $callback return type

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/6053
:Original Authors: Tyson Andre, tandre@php.net
:Slug: any_all_on_iterable
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/any_all_on_iterable
