Algebraic Data Types
====================

:PHP-RFC: 0760
:Title: Algebraic Data Types
:Author: Larry Garfield <larry@garfieldtech.com>, Ilija Tovilo <tovilo.ilija@gmail.com>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Process
:Created: 2020-10-04
:Version: 0.9

Introduction
------------

This is an over-arching description of a multi-step process to add
Algebraic Data Types to PHP. That effort is happening over multiple
implementation RFCs in order to keep them individually digestible.
Algebraic Data Types are a valuable tool in data modeling, and in
"making invalid states unrepresentable," an effective technique for
avoiding many classes of bug.

Proposal
--------

This proposal is implemented in stages. Each stage has its own RFC.
Consult the list below for details of each. They are listed in
approximately the order in which they can and should be implemented,
although in some cases the order may be safely reversed.

-  `Enumerations </rfc/enumerations>`__ - The basic unit enumeration
   type.
-  `Tagged Unions </rfc/tagged_unions>`__ - Associating values with enum
   cases to create tagged unions.
-  `Pattern Matching ``is`` keyword </rfc/pattern-matching>`__ - Pattern
   matching for objects, enumerations, and similar structures. Mainly to
   condense conditional logic around the structure of enumerations and
   value objects.
-  ``isIdentical()`` method override (future scope)
-  Advanced pattern matching (future scope)

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Larry Garfield (larry@garfieldtech.com), Ilija Tovilo (tovilo.ilija@gmail.com)
:Original Status: Meta-RFC
:Slug: adts
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/adts
