Allow NULL
==========

:PHP-RFC: 0761
:Title: Allow NULL
:Author: Craig Francis <craig#at#craigfrancis.co.uk>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2021-12-23
:Version: 1.3

--------------

This RFC has been superseded by `NULL Coercion
Consistency <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/null_coercion_consistency>`__

--------------

Introduction
------------

PHP 8.1 introduced "Deprecate passing null to non-nullable arguments of
internal functions" (`short
discussion <https://externals.io/message/112327>`__), which is making it
difficult (time consuming) for developers to upgrade.

This has introduced an inconstancy when not using *strict_types=1*,
because most variables types (e.g. integers) can be coerced to the
relevant type, but *NULL* has been deprecated.

In PHP *NULL* is often used to represent something; e.g. when a
*GET/POST/COOKIE* variable is undefined:

.. code:: php

   $name = ($_POST['name'] ?? NULL);

   $name = $request->input('name'); // Laravel
   $name = $request->get('name'); // Symfony
   $name = $this->request->getQuery('name'); // CakePHP
   $name = $request->getGet('name'); // CodeIgniter

And *NULL* can be returned from functions, e.g.

-  *array_pop()*
-  *filter_input()*
-  *mysqli_fetch_row()*
-  *error_get_last()*
-  *json_decode()*

This makes it common for *NULL* to be passed to many internal functions,
e.g.

.. code:: php

   trim($name);
   strtoupper($name);
   strlen($name);
   urlencode($name);
   htmlspecialchars($name);
   hash('sha256', $name);
   preg_match('/^[a-z]/', $name);
   setcookie('name', $name);
   socket_write($socket, $name);
   xmlwriter_text($writer, $name);

Developers also use *NULL* to skip certain parameters, e.g.
*$additional_headers* in *mail()*.

Where *NULL* has always been coerced into an empty string, the integer
0, the boolean false, etc.

Currently the deprecation notices only affect those using PHP 8.1 with
*E_DEPRECATED*, but it implies everyone will need to modify their code
to avoid **Fatal Errors** in PHP 9.0.

Developers using *strict_types=1* may find some value in this, but it's
excessive and inconstant for everyone else.

And while individual changes are easy, there are many of them (time
consuming), difficult to find, and often pointless, e.g.

-  urlencode(strval($name));
-  urlencode((string) $name);
-  urlencode($name ?? '');

To find these issues, developers need to either - use these deprecation
notices, or use very strict Static Analysis (one that can determine when
a variable can be *NULL*; e.g. Psalm at `level
3 <https://psalm.dev/docs/running_psalm/error_levels/>`__, with no
baseline).

It's worth noting that some parameters, like *$separator* in
*explode()*, already have a "cannot be empty" Fatal Error. So it might
be useful to have a separate RFC to update some of these parameters to
consistently reject NULL **or** Empty Strings, e.g. *$needle* in
*strpos()* and *$json* in *json_decode()*.

Proposal
--------

There are 3 possible approaches:

#. NULL triggers a Fatal Error with strict_types=1, otherwise allow
   coercion (like how integers can be coerced to a string).
#. NULL triggers a Fatal Error for everyone, but update some parameters
   to explicitly allow NULL (e.g. *?string*).
#. NULL triggers a Fatal Error for everyone (forget about backwards
   compatibility).

This needs to be done before the eventual end of the deprecation period,
and *TypeError* exceptions are thrown.

If we choose to "update some parameters to explicitly allow NULL", there
is a `draft list of
functions <https://github.com/craigfrancis/php-allow-null-rfc/blob/main/functions-change.md>`__,
where the **bold** are being proposed (currently only includes string
parameters).
`Suggestions <https://github.com/craigfrancis/php-allow-null-rfc/issues>`__
and `Pull
Requests <https://github.com/craigfrancis/php-allow-null-rfc/pulls>`__
welcome.

There is also a `Maybe
List <https://github.com/craigfrancis/php-allow-null-rfc/blob/main/functions-maybe.md>`__,
where the more questionable arguments end with a "!". For example,
*strrpos()* accepting an empty string for *$needle* is wired in itself,
and *sodium_crypto_box_open()* should never receive a blank
*$ciphertext*. And there is an `Other
List <https://github.com/craigfrancis/php-allow-null-rfc/blob/main/functions-other.md>`__,
which can be ignored.

Decision Process
----------------

Does *NULL* for this parameter justify a Fatal Error? e.g.

#. *preg_match()* should **deprecate** *NULL* for *$pattern* ("empty
   regular expression" warning).
#. *preg_match()* should **accept** *NULL* for *$subject* (e.g. checking
   user input).
#. *hash_file()* should **deprecate** *NULL* for the *$filename*.
#. *hash()* should **accept** *NULL* for *$data*.
#. *substr_count()* should **deprecate** *NULL* for *$needle* ("$needle
   cannot be empty" error).
#. *mb_convert_encoding()* should **deprecate** *NULL* for
   *$to_encoding* (requires a valid encoding).

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

None

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

PHP 8.2

RFC Impact
----------

To SAPIs
~~~~~~~~

None known

To Existing Extensions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

None known

To Opcache
~~~~~~~~~~

None known

Open Issues
-----------

Is the `list of
functions <https://github.com/craigfrancis/php-allow-null-rfc/blob/main/functions-change.md>`__
complete?

Future Scope
------------

Some function parameters could be updated to complain when an *NULL*
**or** *Empty String* is provided; e.g. *$method* in *method_exists()*,
or *$characters* in *trim()*.

Voting
------

Accept the RFC

TODO

Tests
-----

To get and **Test** the list of functions, I wrote a script to
*get_defined_functions()*, then used *ReflectionFunction()* to identify
parameters that accepted the 'string' type, and not *->allowsNull()*.
This resulted in the `list of functions to
change <https://github.com/craigfrancis/php-allow-null-rfc/blob/main/functions-change.md>`__,
where I manually removed the `functions that shouldn't be
changed <https://github.com/craigfrancis/php-allow-null-rfc/blob/main/functions-other.md>`__,
and updated the script to test every argument (to see that it complained
with *NULL*, and the output remained the same) -
`Source <https://github.com/craigfrancis/php-allow-null-rfc/blob/main/functions.php>`__.

Implementation
--------------

https://github.com/craigfrancis/php-src/compare/master...allow-null

This patch defines *Z_PARAM_STR_ALLOW_NULL*.

It works a bit like *Z_PARAM_STR_OR_NULL*, but it will return an empty
string instead of *NULL*.

It's a fairly easy drop in replacement for *Z_PARAM_STR*, e.g.
`htmlspecialchars() <https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/7b90ebeb3f954123915f6d62fb7b2cd3fdf3c6ec/ext/standard/html.c#L1324>`__.

Rejected Features
-----------------

TODO

Notes
-----

Interesting the example quote from
`Rasmus <http://news.php.net/php.internals/71525>`__ is:

   PHP is and should remain:
   1) a pragmatic web-focused language
   2) a loosely typed language
   3) a language which caters to the skill-levels and platforms of a
   wide range of users

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Github Repo: https://github.com/craigfrancis/php-allow-null-rfc
:Implementation: ?
:Original Authors: Craig Francis, craig#at#craigfrancis.co.uk
:Rfc Started: 2021-12-23
:Rfc Updated: 2022-02-20
:Slug: allow_null
:Voting End: ?
:Voting Start: ?
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/allow_null
