Direct Execution Opcode File Without Php Source Code File
=========================================================

:PHP-RFC: 0766
:Title: Direct Execution Opcode File Without Php Source Code File
:Author: chopins <xiaochopins.xiao@gmail.com>
:Status: Declined
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2020-11-13
:Version: 0.1

Introduction
------------

The current OPCache cannot get rid of the source file to execute the
opcode file. The path will allow OPCache direct execution opcode file
without php source code file.

This function is similar to java, python, .net etc. performing bytecode
functions. However, the existing execution and operation mechanism of
PHP is not changed.

Proposal
--------

Copy use **opcache_compile_file()** function complie result file to
special path. then prepend flag (**<?phpo**) and php_version_id to copy
of file.

When executing, judge whether the loaded PHP file is an opcode file
based on the flag. if no flag, will run as it is now.If is opcode file
will direct execution without check php source file.

The **includes()** **includes_once()** and **require()**
**require_one()** can load opcode file. So if you include opcode files,
the source code must use the compiled file path instead of the source
file path.

Change function to:

.. code:: php

   opcache_compile_file(string $file, string $opcode_file = null): bool

Implement a schematic flowchart
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The PHP source code file is compiled into an opcode file flowchart:
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

1. current process:

.. code:: php

   [php-load-source] ---> [compile to opcode] --->  [store to cache system directory]

2. path change to process:

.. code:: php

   [php-load-source] ---> [compile to opcode] ---> [save to cache system directory] ---> [copy cache file to the specified path]

3. When specified path, the opcode file format change to like below:

.. code:: php

   <?phpo{phpversionid}OPCACHE575d367cc725713f6f170910d6e9ee5e-------BINARY CONTENT OF OPCODE----

**The above code explains:**

::

    - **<?phpo**:   is opcode file flag. when specified compile to file prepend
    - **{phpversionid}**:   is current php version id. when specified compile to file prepend
    - **OPCACHE575d367cc725713f6f170910d6e9ee5e**:  opcode file magic info and systemid. it's not change.
    - **-------BINARY CONTENT OF OPCODE----**:  opcode data, it's not change

OPCache extentsion exec flowchart:
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

1. current opcache exec process:

.. code:: php

   [php] ---> [find cache in cache system directory] --->x---> [found] -->[exec opcode]
                                                          \---> [not found] ---> [exec php source]

2. path added process:

.. code:: php

   [php/phpo] --->x---> [is phpo] ---> [load the phpo file] ---> [exec opcode]
                  \--->[not phpo] ---> [find cache in cache system directory] --->x---> [found] ---> [exec opcode]
                                                                                   \---> [not found] ---> [exec php source] ---> [auto cache opcode]

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

PHP's constant is similar to a C macro，their values are determined when
compiled into opcode. Therefore, the value of the system-related
constant depends on the compiler's system environment. So magic constant
**\__FILE_\_** is set to the absolute path of the compiler's php source
file, instead of the absolute path of the opcode file when executed.
**\__DIR_\_** and **\__LINE_\_** also have this problem. Therefore,
applications that rely on these constants are affected.

The file path obtained by **error reporting**, **exceptions**,
**reflections**, will also be the path to the compiled file, not the
current opcode file path.

Proposed PHP Version
--------------------

PHP 8.x

RFC Impact
----------

To SAPIs
~~~~~~~~

None.

To Existing Extensions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

not support direct execution opcode file in phar.

To Opcache
~~~~~~~~~~

Opcache can direct execution opcode file without php source file. When
direct execution opcode file, will remove verify **accel_system_id** and
**validate_timestamps**. Other is compatible.

New Constants
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

None.

php.ini Defaults
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If there are any php.ini settings then list:

-  opcache.allow_direct_exec_opcode

   -  if set 0, default value, same as the current state, can not direct
      exec any opcode file
   -  if set 1, only when opcode file start is **<?phpo**, direct exec
      opcode file without php source file

-  opcache.prohibit_different_version_opcode

   -  set 1, default value, different version opcode file exec are
      prohibited
   -  set 0, different version opcode file will report **E_WARNING**
      message

Some scenarios
--------------

#. This RFC will avoid cold start on the WEB service and avoid opcache
   expiration. For example, when deploying PHP applications through
   docker, cold starts are avoided when adding docker services.
#. Desktop applications developed with PHP, but require some code
   protection to avoid being easily modified. For example, internal
   systems, but can avoid non-professional error modifications.
#. Zend Guard can be simply replaced.
#. The php project is compiled into a binary file instead of packaged
   into a file.
#. To some extent, the security of code deployed on public servers is
   protected, such as shared hosts

Vote
----

Voting opens 2021-04-05 and 2021-04-20 at 00:00:00 UTC. 2/3 required to
accept.

Question: Add OPCache direct execution opcode without source file
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Patches and Tests
-----------------

https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/6146

Implementation
--------------

`75fbf645c431f1afbcc4418ddda86f5afec98853 <https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/6146/commits/75fbf645c431f1afbcc4418ddda86f5afec98853>`__

References
----------

#. `Main thread <https://externals.io/message/111965>`__
#. `About magic constant <https://externals.io/message/112482>`__

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: chopins xiao(chopins.xiao@gmail.com)
:Slug: direct-execution-opcode
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/direct-execution-opcode
