Restrict $GLOBALS Usage
=======================

:PHP-RFC: 0768
:Title: Restrict $GLOBALS Usage
:Author: Nikita Popov <nikic@php.net>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2020-12-02
:PHP-Version: 8.1
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

The ``$GLOBALS`` variable currently provides a direct reference to PHP's
internal symbol table. Supporting this requires significant technical
complexity, affects performance of all array operations in PHP, but is
only rarely used. This RFC restricts supported usages of ``$GLOBALS`` to
disallow the problematic cases, while allowing most code to continue
working as-is.

First, some technical background on how ``$GLOBALS`` currently works is
necessary. Consider this simple example:

.. code:: php

   $a = 1;
   $GLOBALS['a'] = 2;
   var_dump($a); // int(2)

The variable ``$a`` is stored inside a compiled-variable (CV) call frame
slot on the virtual machine stack, which allows it to be accessed
efficiently. In order to allow modification of the variable through
``$GLOBALS``, the ``$GLOBALS`` array stores array elements of type
``INDIRECT``, which contain a pointer to the CV slot.

As such, array operations on ``$GLOBALS`` need to check whether the
accessed element is ``INDIRECT`` and perform a de-indirection operation.
However, as *any* array could potentially be the ``$GLOBALS`` array,
this check has to be performed for essentially all array operations on
all arrays. This imposes an implementation and performance cost to
account for a rarely used edge-case.

Additionally, the ``$GLOBALS`` array is excluded from the usual by-value
behavior of PHP arrays:

.. code:: php

   $a = 1;
   $globals = $GLOBALS; // Ostensibly by-value copy
   $globals['a'] = 2;
   var_dump($a); // int(2)

According to normal PHP semantics, ``$globals`` should be a copy of
``$GLOBALS`` and modifications of ``$globals`` should not have any
impact on the global symbol table.

Finally, there currently is a mismatch between handling of integer keys
between ``$GLOBALS`` and normal PHP arrays:

.. code:: php

   ${1} = 1;
   $GLOBALS[1] = 2;
   var_dump(${1}); // int(1)

Normal PHP arrays will canonicalize integral string keys to integers,
while symbol tables canonicalize integer keys to strings. As
``$GLOBALS`` interfaces between these two worlds, it cannot satisfy the
rules of either.

An area where ``INDIRECT`` elements present only in ``$GLOBALS`` are
particularly problematic are standard library functions. While
``array_*`` functions generally contain the necessary extra code to
correctly handle ``$GLOBALS``, this does not extend to the broader
standard library. Functions that do not explicitly account for
``$GLOBALS`` will either silently misbehave, cause assertion failures,
or crash. Functions from 3rd-party extensions almost certainly do not
handle ``$GLOBALS``.

Proposal
--------

The core idea of this proposal is to move ``$GLOBALS`` from being a
"real" variable with non-standard semantics, towards being a syntactical
variable with two semantics:

-  Accesses of the form ``$GLOBALS[$var]`` will refer to the global
   variable ``$$var``, and support all the usual variable operations,
   including writes. ``$GLOBALS[$var] = $value`` remains supported. A
   good way to think of this is that ``$GLOBALS[$var]`` works the same
   way as a variable-variable ``$$var``, just accessing the global
   instead of the local scope.
-  Accesses of the form ``$GLOBALS`` (without a direct array
   dereference) will return the a **read-only** copy of the global
   symbol table.

This means that all operations in the following code will continue to
work as they do now:

.. code:: php

   // Continues to work:
   $GLOBALS['x'] = 1;
   $GLOBALS['x']++;
   isset($GLOBALS['x']);
   unset($GLOBALS['x']);
   // ...anything else using $GLOBALS['x'].

Read-only usage of ``$GLOBALS`` will also continue to work:

.. code:: php

   // Continues to work:
   foreach ($GLOBALS as $var => $value) {
       echo "$var => $value\n";
   }

In this case the only difference is that there will no longer be a
recursive ``"GLOBALS"`` key, which currently needs to be filtered out
from most uses of ``$GLOBALS``.

What is no longer supported are writes to ``$GLOBALS`` taken as a whole.
All of the following will generate a compile-time error:

.. code:: php

   // Generates compile-time error:
   $GLOBALS = [];
   $GLOBALS += [];
   $GLOBALS =& $x;
   $x =& $GLOBALS;
   unset($GLOBALS);
   // ...and any other write/read-write operation on $GLOBALS

Passing ``$GLOBALS`` by reference will trigger a runtime ``Error``
exception, as by-reference passing can generally only be established at
runtime:

.. code:: php

   // Generates run-time Error exception:
   by_ref($GLOBALS);

As ``$GLOBALS`` is now a read-only copy of the global symbol table, the
previously incorrect behavior of this code is fixed:

.. code:: php

   // This no longer modifies $a. The previous behavior violated by-value semantics.
   $globals = $GLOBALS;
   $globals['a'] = 1;

The read-only copy will also use correct key canonicalization, as such
the behavior of this code is fixed:

.. code:: php

   ${1} = 1;
   $GLOBALS[1] = 2;
   var_dump(${1}); // int(2)

Impact on internals
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

From an implementation perspective, these changes mean that ``INDIRECT``
elements no longer have to be considered when working on ordinary PHP
arrays (though many places didn't do so in the first place). However,
``INDIRECT`` elements still need to be considered when working with
certain special hashtables. In particular, internal symbol tables, as
well as object property tables may still contain ``INDIRECT`` elements.
However, these special hashtables will never escape into ordinary PHP
arrays.

Apart from manual checks for ``IS_INDIRECT``, the use of the following
APIs is no longer necessary:

-  ``*_IND()`` HT iteration macros. Suffix-free macros can be used
   instead.
-  ``*_ind()`` HT functions. Suffix-free functions can be used instead.
-  ``zend_array_count()``. Use of ``zend_hash_num_elements()`` is now
   safe.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

Indirect modification of ``$GLOBALS`` will no longer be supported, which
is a backwards-incompatible change.

In the top 2k composer packages I found 23 cases that use ``$GLOBALS``
without directly dereferecing it (full list:
https://gist.github.com/nikic/9fd95866f9811b349b947f63214ad7a9). Based
on a cursory inspection, there are only two instances where ``$GLOBALS``
is not used in a read-only way:

-  By-ref passing of ``$GLOBALS`` in
   `phpseclib <https://github.com/phpseclib/phpseclib/blob/7e72d923ceb8b7456a64149f10d6b04c43e9281a/phpseclib/Crypt/Random.php#L104>`__:
   This code is doing something very peculiar, and I wasn't able to
   figure out what the purpose of the ``safe_serialize()`` function is.
   Possibly very old versions of PHP caused infinite recursion when
   serializing ``$GLOBALS``?
-  ``$GLOBALS = array()`` in
   `phpstorm-stubs <https://github.com/JetBrains/phpstorm-stubs/blob/master/superglobals/_superglobals.php#L10>`__:
   This is not real code, so the usage is not problematic.

As such, the impact of this change is expected to be fairly low. Which
isn't to say non-existent: bwoebi has shared an example from his
codebase that would be affected:

.. code:: php

   extract($GLOBALS, EXTR_REFS);
   // ...
   $GLOBALS += get_defined_vars();

Both of these lines constitute indirect modification and will no longer
work. It is possible to rewrite them in terms of explicit loops:

.. code:: php

   foreach ($GLOBALS as $var => $_) $$var =& $GLOBALS[$var];
   // ...
   foreach (get_defined_vars() as $var => $value) $GLOBALS[$var] = $value;

Vote
----

Yes/No. Voting started 2020-12-23 and closes 2021-01-06.

Question: Restrict $GLOBALS usage as specified?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/6487
:Original Authors: Nikita Popov nikic@php.net
:Original PHP Version: PHP 8.1
:Slug: restrict_globals_usage
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/restrict_globals_usage
