Phasing Out Serializable
========================

:PHP-RFC: 0771
:Title: Phasing Out Serializable
:Author: Nikita Popov <nikic@php.net>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2020-12-07
:PHP-Version: 8.1
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

The `new custom object serialization
mechanism </rfc/custom_object_serialization>`__ RFC introduced new
``__serialize()`` and ``__unserialize()`` magic methods in PHP 7.4, with
the intent of replacing the broken ``Serializable`` interface. This RFC
finalizes that work by laying out a plan for the eventual removal of
``Serializable``.

Please see the referenced RFC for a detailed discussion of why the
``Serializable`` interface is broken and needs to be replaced. Since PHP
7.4 a robust alternative mechanism exists, but some of the motivating
issues will only be resolved once support for ``Serializable`` is
dropped entirely.

Proposal
--------

Serializable
~~~~~~~~~~~~

A class is "only Serializable" if it is non-abstract, implements
``Serializable``, and does not implement ``__serialize()`` and
``__unserialize()``. Then:

-  In PHP 8.1, declaring an "only Serializable" class will throw a
   deprecation warning. Other implementations of ``Serializable`` will
   be accepted without a deprecation warning, because libraries
   supporting PHP < 7.4 will generally need to implement both the old
   and new mechanisms.
-  In PHP 9.0 the ``Serializable`` interface will be removed and
   ``unserialize()`` will reject payloads using the ``C`` serialization
   format. Code needing to support both PHP < 7.4 and PHP >= 9.0 may
   polyfill the ``Serializable`` interface, though it will have no
   effect on serialization.

If a class implements both ``Serializable`` and
``__serialize()``/``__unserialize()``, the latter take precedence (on
versions that support them), and the ``Serializable`` interface is only
used to decode existing serialization payload using the obsolete ``C``
format. To migrate to the new mechanism, it's possible to either replace
``Serializable`` entirely (if support for PHP 7.3 and below is not
needed) or to implement both (if it is needed).

An earlier version of this RFC proposed an additional step: PHP 9.0
would deprecate all uses of Serializable (including those that are not
"only Serializable") and only remove the interface in PHP 10.0. However,
this approach was deemed too complicated.

PDO::FETCH_SERIALIZE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

PDO has a ``PDO::FETCH_SERIALIZE`` flag that can be used in conjunction
with ``PDO::FETCH_CLASS``. This fetch mode is based on the
``Serializable`` interface, and as such it cannot be supported once it
is removed. Apparently, the ``PDO::FETCH_SERIALIZE`` mode is not
actually usable due to an implementation bug
(https://bugs.php.net/bug.php?id=68802) anyway.

In addition to the ``Serializable`` changes, this RFC proposes to
deprecate ``PDO::FETCH_SERIALIZE`` in PHP 8.1 and remove it in PHP 9.0.

Vote
----

Voting started 2021-04-14 and ended 2021-04-28.

Question: Phase out Serializable as proposed?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/6494
:Original Authors: Nikita Popov nikic@php.net
:Original PHP Version: PHP 8.1
:Slug: phase_out_serializable
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/phase_out_serializable
