Short Match
===========

:PHP-RFC: 0773
:Title: Short Match
:Author: Larry Garfield <larry@garfieldtech.com>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2020-12-13
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

The ``match()`` expression, introduced in PHP 8.0, matches one value
against a series of others. For more complex cases, it's possible to
provide a value of boolean ``true`` as the value to match against,
allowing each branch to be arbitrarily complex as long as it results in
a boolean. This RFC allows that case to be used as a default; It makes
the value to match against optional, and defaults it to boolean ``true``
if not specified.

This functionality was included in the original `Match expression
v1 </rfc/match_expression>`__ RFC. It was removed from the second `Match
expression v2 </rfc/match_expression_v2>`__ RFC for simplicity. However,
the poll from the first RFC suggested this was a desired feature, so
this RFC brings it back.

Proposal
--------

This RFC would make only one change. In a ``match()`` expression, if the
match subject were not provided, it would default to boolean ``true``.

That is, this PHP 8.0 syntax:

.. code:: php

   $a = 3;

   print match (true) {
     $a < 2 => 'small',
     $a == 3 => 'medium',
     default => 'large',
   };

could, with this RFC, be shortened to:

.. code:: php

   $a = 3;

   print match {
     $a < 2 => 'small',
     $a == 3 => 'medium',
     default => 'large',
   };

A prime use case for such match statements is for basic pattern matching
within a function:

.. code:: php

   function getNumberKind(int $num) {
     return match {
       $num > 0 => NumberKind::POSITIVE,
       $num == 0 => NumberKind::ZERO,
       $num < 0 => NumberKind::NEGATIVE,
     };
   }

That would be even more compact if combined with the also-proposed
`Short Functions </rfc/short-functions>`__ RFC. Or, if used with a
short-lambda today:

.. code:: php

   $getNumber = fn(int $num) => match {
       $num < 0 => NumberKind::NEGATIVE,
       $num == 0 => NumberKind::ZERO,
       $num > 0 => NumberKind::POSITIVE,
   };

The net result is to simplify both the writing and reading of "functions
as expressions" rather than "functions as subroutines."

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

None

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

8.1

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

Accept this RFC as proposed. 2/3 required for passage.

Patches and Tests
-----------------

`PR available here <https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/6511>`__

Implementation
--------------

References
----------

-  `PHP RFC: Match expression </rfc/match_expression>`__
-  `PHP RFC: Match expression v2 </rfc/match_expression_v2>`__
-  `PHP RFC: Short Functions </rfc/short-functions>`__

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Larry Garfield (larry@garfieldtech.com)
:Slug: short-match
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/short-match
