Add PDO Function: MysqlGetWarningCount
======================================

:PHP-RFC: 0794
:Title: Add PDO Function: MysqlGetWarningCount
:Author: Daniel Beardsley <dbeardsl@gmail.com>
:Status: Withdrawn
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2021-02-26
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

Knowing if a query you ran generated warnings in your database is very
important. MySQL warns about values getting truncated, inserting nulls
into not-null columns and lots of other things. PDO currently makes
discovering these warnings harder and more expensive than it needs to
be. Right now, this requires running **another query**
(``SHOW WARNINGS``) after each query, incurring another round trip over
the network to the database. It turns out that MySQL already provides
the warning count in the meta-data of every result set, but PDO doesn't
make it accessible.

Proposal
--------

Add a function that exposes the warning count of the most recent
statement for MySQL: ``$pdo->mysqlGetWarningCount()``. It returns an
``int`` straight from the MySQL driver. This fixes the open bug at:
https://bugs.php.net/bug.php?id=51499.

Caveat
------

I didn't look at every one, but most other SQL drivers don't seem to
have a concept of "SHOW WARNINGS" and thus this feature (getting the
warning count) only really applies to MySQL. Regarding maintenance, the
MySQL function that this code wraps hasn't change in decades and isn't
likely to change in the future, so maintenance should be low to nil.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

None

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

I made the pull-request against 7.4, but this is applicable to all php
versions.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

"Yes" means this pull request should be merged (pending code review).
"No" means we don't want PDO to expose MySQLs warning count.

Patches and Tests
-----------------

There's an open pull with tests:
https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/6677

Vote
----

Voting opened on 2021-07-06 and closes on 2021-07-21

Question: Add PDO function: mysqlGetWarningCount
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Daniel Beardsley, dbeardsl@gmail.com
:Original Status: Declined (Abandoned)
:Slug: pdo-mysql-get-warning-count
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/pdo-mysql-get-warning-count
