Noreturn Type
=============

:PHP-RFC: 0798
:Title: Noreturn Type
:Author: Matt Brown <php@muglug.com>, Ondřej Mirtes <ondrej@mirtes.cz>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2021-03-10
:PHP-Version: 8.1
:Version: 0.1

Introduction
------------

There has been a trend over the past few years that concepts initially
just expressed in PHP docblocks eventually become native PHP types. Past
examples are: `scalar
typehints <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/scalar_type_hints_v5>`__, `return
types <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/return_types>`__, `union
types <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/union_types_v2>`__, `mixed
types <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/mixed_type_v2>`__, and `static
types <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/static_return_type>`__.

Our static analysis tools currently provide support for '' @return
noreturn '' docblocks to denote functions that always ``throw`` or
``exit``. Users of these tools have found that syntax useful to describe
the behaviour of their own code, but we think it’s even more useful as a
native return type, where PHP compile-time and runtime type-checks can
guarantee its behaviour.

Proposal
--------

Introduce a ``noreturn`` type that can be used in functions that always
``throw`` or ``exit``.

Redirect functions that always call ``exit`` (either explicitly or
implicitly) are good candidates for such a return type:

.. code:: php

   function redirect(string $uri): noreturn {
       header('Location: ' . $uri);
       exit();
   }

   function redirectToLoginPage(): noreturn {
       redirect('/login');
   }

PHP developers can call these functions, safe in the knowledge that no
statements after the function call will be evaluated:

.. code:: php

   function sayHello(?User $user) {
       if (!$user) {
           redirectToLoginPage();
       }

       echo 'Hello ' . $user->getName();
   }

If, at some later date, the redirect function is changed so that it does
*sometimes* return a value, a compile error is produced:

.. code:: php

   function redirect(string $uri): noreturn {
       if ($uri === '') {
           return; // Fatal error: A noreturn function must not return
       }
       header('Location: ' . $uri);
       exit();
   }

If, instead, the above function is rewritten to have an *implicit*
return, a ``TypeError`` is emitted:

.. code:: php

   function redirect(string $uri): noreturn {
       if ($uri !== '') {
           header('Location: ' . $uri);
           exit();
       }
   }

   redirect(''); // Uncaught TypeError: redirect(): Nothing was expected to be returned

Attempting to use ``yield`` inside a ``noreturn`` function produces a
compile-time error:

.. code:: php

   function generateList(string $uri): noreturn {
       yield 1;
       exit();
   }
   // Fatal error: Generator return type must be a supertype of Generator

Applicability
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Like ``void``, the ``noreturn`` type is only valid when used as a
function return type. Using ``noreturn`` as an argument or property type
produces a compile-time error:

.. code:: php

   class A {
       public noreturn $x; // Fatal error
   }

Variance
~~~~~~~~

In type theory ``noreturn`` would be called a "bottom" type. That means
it's effectively a subtype of every other type in PHP’s type system,
including ``void``.

It obeys the rules you might expect of a universal subtype:

Return type covariance is allowed:

.. code:: php

   abstract class Person
   {
       abstract public function hasAgreedToTerms(): bool;
   }

   class Kid extends Person
   {
       public function hasAgreedToTerms(): noreturn
       {
           throw new \Exception('Kids cannot legally agree to terms');
       }
   }

Return type contravariance is prohibited:

.. code:: php

   abstract class Redirector
   {
       abstract public function execute(): noreturn;
   }

   class BadRedirector extends Redirector
   {
       public function execute(): void {} // Fatal error
   }

Returning by reference with a ``noreturn`` type is allowed as well.

.. code:: php

   class A {
       public function &test(): int { ... }
   }
   class B extends A {
       public function &test(): noreturn { throw new Exception; }
   }

Returning ``noreturn`` is also allowed in \__toString methods:

.. code:: php

   class A implements Stringable {
       public function __toString(): string {
           return "hello";
       }
   }

   class B extends A {
       public function __toString(): noreturn {
           throw new \Exception('not supported');
       }
   }

Allowed return types when a function always throws
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Since ``noreturn`` is a subtype of all other types, a function that
*could* be annotated with ``noreturn`` can still safely be annotated
with another return type:

.. code:: php

   function doFoo(): int
   {
       throw new \Exception();
   }

Prior art in other interpreted languages
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Hacklang has a `noreturn
   type <https://docs.hhvm.com/hack/built-in-types/noreturn>`__.
-  TypeScript has a `never
   type <https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/basic-types.html#never>`__
   that's also an explicit bottom type.
-  Python has a `NoReturn
   type <https://docs.python.org/3/library/typing.html#typing.NoReturn>`__
   as part of its official typing library.

Prior art in PHP static analysis tools
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the absence of an explicit return type some PHP static analysis tools
have also adopted support for ``noreturn`` or similar:

-  Psalm and PHPStan support the docblock return type
   ``/** @return noreturn */``
-  PHPStorm supports a custom PHP 8 attribute
   ``#[JetBrains\PhpStorm\NoReturn]``

Comparison to void
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Both ``noreturn`` and ``void`` are both only valid as return types, but
there the similarity ends.

When you call a function that returns ``void`` you generally expect PHP
to execute the next statement after that function call.

.. code:: php

   function sayHello(string $name): void {
       echo "Hello $name";
   }

   sayHello('World');
   echo ", it’s nice to meet you";

But when you call a function that returns ``noreturn`` you explicitly do
not expect PHP to execute whatever statement follows:

.. code:: php

   function redirect(string $uri): noreturn {
       header('Location: ' . $uri);
       exit();
   }

   redirect('/index.html');
   echo "this will never be executed!";

Attributes vs types
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Some might feel that ``noreturn`` belongs as a function/method
attribute, potentially a root-namespaced one:

Attribute form:

.. code:: php

   #[\NoReturn]
   function redirectToLoginPage(): void {...}

Type form:

.. code:: php

   function redirectToLoginPage(): noreturn {...}

We believe it’s more useful as a type. Internally PHP has a much more
straightforward interpretation of return types than attributes, and PHP
can quickly check variance rules for ``noreturn`` types just as it does
for ``void``. It's also tidier.

Naming
~~~~~~

Naming is hard. We each have different preferences.

Arguments for ``noreturn``:

-  Very unlikely to be used as an existing class name.
-  Describes the behaviour of the function.

Arguments for ``never``:

-  It's a single word - ``noreturn`` does not have any visual separator
   between the two words and one cannot be sensibly added e.g.
   ``no-return``.
-  It's a full-fledged type, rather than a keyword used in a specific
   situation. A far-in-the-future generics proposal could use ``never``
   as a placeholder inside `contravariant generic
   types <https://docs.hhvm.com/hack/built-in-types/nothing#usages>`__.

Backwards Incompatible Changes
------------------------------

``noreturn`` becomes a reserved word in PHP 8.1

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

8.1

Patches and Tests
-----------------

Draft implementation here: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/6761

Vote
----

Voting opens 2021-03-30 and 2021-04-13 at 11:00:00 AM EDT. 2/3 required
to accept.

Question: Add noreturn type
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Following vote requires simple majority:

Question: noreturn vs never
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-1:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  noreturn
-  never

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/6761
:Original Authors: Matt Brown php@muglug.com & Ondřej Mirtes ondrej@mirtes.cz
:Original PHP Version: PHP 8.1
:Slug: noreturn_type
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/noreturn_type
