Final Class Constants
=====================

:PHP-RFC: 0811
:Title: Final Class Constants
:Author: Máté Kocsis <kocsismate@php.net>
:Status: Implemented
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2021-04-23
:PHP-Version: 8.1
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

Currently, class constants are always overridable by child classes. This
causes a few smaller caveats:

First of all, the engine can't optimize class constant references when
late static binding is involved, so it has to pessimistically assume
that ``FOO`` is overridden in case of ``static::FOO`` or ``$this::FOO``
invocations.

What's more important is that class constants are not guaranteed to stay
constant. Even if the declaring class always references them by using
``self::``, doing so won't prevent a child class from changing their
value or even their type, unless the parent is a final class. Although
constants not being constants is usually considered only as a
theoretical problem, being able to add a ``final`` modifier would make
the intention explicit that child classes shouldn't try to override them
(e.g. because the parent doesn't use late static binding).

A related interesting fact is that interface constants are already
``final``:

.. code:: php

   interface I
   {
       public const X = "i";
   }

   class C implements I
   {
       public const X = "bar";
   }

   // Fatal error: Cannot inherit previously-inherited or override constant X from interface I

This leads to a weird inconsistency. By introducing an intermediate
class, overriding still becomes possible:

.. code:: php

   interface I
   {
       public const X = "i";
   }

   class C implements I
   {
   }

   class D extends C 
   {
       public const X = "d";
   }

   // No error

Proposal
--------

The final modifier can be added to class constants. Doing so prevents
overriding of a constant:

.. code:: php

   class Foo
   {
       final public const X = "foo";
   }

   class Bar extends Foo
   {
       public const X = "bar";
   }

   // Fatal error: Bar::X cannot override final constant Foo::X

Besides, interface constants would become overridable by default, and
the ``final`` modifier could be used to retain the original behavior.

.. code:: php

   interface I
   {
       public const X = "i";
       final public const Y = "i";
   }

   class C implements I
   {
       public const X = "c"; // Overriding I::X is possible
       public const Y = "c"; // Overriding I::Y is not possible
   }

   // Fatal error: C::Y cannot override final constant I::Y

Reflection
----------

A ``ReflectionClassConstant::isFinal()`` method is added in order to be
able to retrieve if a constant is final.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

None.

Vote
----

Voting started on 2021-05-19 08:00 UTC and ends 2021-06-02 08:00 UTC.
The vote requires 2/3 majority to be accepted.

Question: Add support for final class constants?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/6878
:Original Authors: Máté Kocsis kocsismate@php.net
:Original PHP Version: PHP 8.1
:Slug: final_class_const
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/final_class_const
