Json_encode Indentation
=======================

:PHP-RFC: 0820
:Title: Json_encode Indentation
:Author: Timon de Groot <tdegroot96@gmail.com>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2021-06-03
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

Programs can serialize data to JSON using the
`json_encode <https://www.php.net/manual/en/function.json-encode.php>`__
function. The function is widely used for generating JSON responses or
payload over HTTP. Currently, it's not possible to tell json_encode what
indentation level (2 spaces, 4 spaces, etc.) should be used when using
the *JSON_PRETTY_PRINT* option. When generating JSON files which can be
used/read/edited by users, indentation starts to become a relevant
topic.

Proposal
--------

Introducing a 4th parameter, called *indent*. The type of the parameter
is int and its default value is 4.

By default, an indentation of 4 spaces will be applied, just like the
original *json_encode* behaviour with the *JSON_PRETTY_PRINT* option.

When the *indent* parameter is passed a different value, an indentation
of N spaces will be applied.

.. code:: php

   $data = [
       'key' => 4,
       'other_key' => [2]
   ];

   echo json_encode(['behavior' => 'default'], JSON_PRETTY_PRINT) . PHP_EOL;
   echo json_encode($data, JSON_PRETTY_PRINT, 512, 2) . PHP_EOL;

   ?>

.. code:: json

   {
       "behavior": "default"
   }
   {
     "key": 4,
     "other_key": [
       2
     ]
   }

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

The only breaking change this could cause is when programs are already
passing a fourth parameter by accident.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

-  next PHP 8.x

Unaffected PHP Functionality
----------------------------

Normal usage (as opposed to what is described in BIC) of the json_encode
function will not be affected, as the default of 4 spaces will still be
in effect.

Patches and Tests
-----------------

Tests are written with the RFC

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/7093
:Original Authors: Timon de Groot, tdegroot96@gmail.com
:Original Status: Under discussion
:Slug: json_encode_indentation
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/json_encode_indentation
