Add Http_parse_query As An Alternative To Parse_str
===================================================

:PHP-RFC: 0824
:Title: Add Http_parse_query As An Alternative To Parse_str
:Author: Kamil Tekiela <dharman@php.net>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2021-06-23
:PHP-Version: 8.2
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

PHP offers a function for parsing query string into an array. The
function historically has been a mockery as it allowed to register the
values as global variables. Since PHP 8.0 this is no longer possible.
The function still has two main downsides: a confusing name, and no
return value (it returns by out parameter instead).

.. code:: php

   $str = "first=value&arr[]=foo+bar&arr[]=baz";

   parse_str($str, $output);
   echo $output['first'];  // value
   echo $output['arr'][0]; // foo bar
   echo $output['arr'][1]; // baz

Proposal
--------

The proposal is to create a new function as a copy of parse_str() but
change the name to http_parse_query() and return the array instead of
using the out parameter. The new function will take only one argument.

The new function will also be maintained in the manual under
https://www.php.net/manual/en/ref.url.php instead of
https://www.php.net/manual/en/ref.strings.php

.. code:: php

   $str = "first=value&arr[]=foo+bar&arr[]=baz";

   $output = http_parse_query($str);
   echo $output['first'];  // value
   echo $output['arr'][0]; // foo bar
   echo $output['arr'][1]; // baz

Open Points
-----------

Should PHP remove name mangling?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As suggested on the mailing list, the name mangling does not serve any
purpose anymore. It was a way to simplify variable access when register
globals was used. Since PHP 8.0, this functionality is not available
anymore, so the question is should we remove the name mangling from PHP
parse functions completely (which would require a separate RFC and smart
deprecation path) or should we remove it only from the new function?

If we should remove name mangling, what should happen to mismatched
square brackets?

Should it be implemented in OOP way instead?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Maybe the replacement should be in a form of a full-fledged class with
properties from two-way conversion from string to PHP array/object. What
would such API look like? What functionality is missing currently from
PHP? Do we need such API in core or can we just expose a function like
http_parse_query() and let the rest be implemented in userland?

Future Scope
------------

The parse_str() function will get deprecated in the next minor release
and removed in the next major release.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

There will be no breaking change to existing functionality. The new
function is designed to give users a way to move away from parse_str()
so that we can deprecate it and remove it.

Vote
----

Simple yes/no vote.

Question: Add new http_parse_query() function?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Discussion on internals
-----------------------

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/7344
:Original Authors: Kamil Tekiela dharman@php.net
:Original PHP Version: PHP 8.2
:Original Status: Discussion
:Slug: parse_str_alternative
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/parse_str_alternative
