Readonly Classes
================

:PHP-RFC: 0829
:Title: Readonly Classes
:Author: Máté Kocsis <kocsismate@php.net>
:Status: Accepted
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2021-08-04
:PHP-Version: 8.2
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

PHP 8.1 added support for readonly properties via `PHP RFC: Readonly
properties 2.0 </rfc/readonly_properties_v2>`__. However, it's still not
easy to declare (quasi-)immutable classes, especially if they contain
many properties. Therefore, this RFC proposes to add support for
``readonly`` classes.

Proposal
--------

The usage of the ``readonly`` modifier added by `PHP RFC: Readonly
properties 2.0 </rfc/readonly_properties_v2>`__ is extended to classes:

.. code:: php

   readonly class Test {
       public string $prop;
   }

Doing so will implicitly mark all instance properties of a class as
readonly. Furthermore, it will prevent the creation of dynamic
properties.

.. code:: php

   readonly class Foo
   {
       public int $bar;

       public function __construct() {
           $this->bar = 1;
       }
   }

   $foo = new Foo();
   $foo->bar = 2;
   // Fatal Error: Uncaught Error: Cannot modify readonly property Foo::$bar

   $foo->baz = 1;
   // Fatal Error: Uncaught Error: Cannot create dynamic property Foo::$baz

`PHP RFC: Deprecate dynamic
properties </rfc/deprecate_dynamic_properties>`__ added support for the
``#[AllowDynamicProperties]`` attribute which makes it possible to
create dynamic properties without triggering errors. In order not to
violate the read-only constraint, marking readonly classes with the
above attribute is a compile-time error:

.. code:: php

   #[AllowDynamicProperties]
   readonly class Foo {
   }

   // Fatal error: Cannot apply #[AllowDynamicProperties] to readonly class Foo

Restrictions
~~~~~~~~~~~~

As neither untyped, nor static properties are covered by the `Readonly
properties RFC </rfc/readonly_properties_v2#restrictions>`__, readonly
classes cannot declare them either:

.. code:: php

   readonly class Foo
   {
       public $bar;
   }

   // Fatal error: Readonly property Foo::$bar must have type

.. code:: php

   readonly class Foo
   {
       public static int $bar;
   }

   // Fatal error: Readonly class Foo cannot declare static properties

Inheritance
~~~~~~~~~~~

Similarly how overriding of readonly properties works, a readonly class
can only extend a readonly parent:

.. code:: php

   readonly class A {}
   readonly class B extends A {} // valid

But both of the following are illegal:

.. code:: php

   readonly class A {}
   class B extends A {}
   // Fatal error: Non-readonly class B cannot extend readonly class A

.. code:: php

   class A {}
   readonly class B extends A {}
   // Fatal error: Readonly class B cannot extend non-readonly class A

Reflection
~~~~~~~~~~

A ``ReflectionClass::isReadOnly()`` method is added, which reports
whether a class is declared as read-only. Additionally,
``ReflectionClass::getModifiers()`` will also include the
``ReflectionClass::IS_READONLY`` flag.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

None.

Vote
----

Voted started on 2022-04-27, ending on 2022-05-11

Question: Add readonly classes as proposed?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/7305
:Original Authors: Máté Kocsis kocsismate@php.net
:Original PHP Version: PHP 8.2
:Slug: readonly_classes
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/readonly_classes
