Unwrap Reference After Foreach
==============================

:PHP-RFC: 0830
:Title: Unwrap Reference After Foreach
:Author: Nikita Popov <nikic@php.net>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2021-08-13
:PHP-Version: 8.2
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

After a foreach by reference loop, the value variable currently remains
a reference to the last array element, which may result in unexpected
behavior if the variable is later reused. This RFC proposes to unwrap
the reference after the foreach loop.

This RFC addresses a relatively well known footgun when using foreach by
reference. Despite a `prominent documentation
warning <https://www.php.net/manual/en/control-structures.foreach.php>`__,
we still regularly receive bug reports about this behavior. The issue is
illustrated in the following:

.. code:: php

   $array = [1, 2, 3];
   foreach ($array as &$value) { /* ... */ }
   foreach ($array as $value) { /* ... */ }
   var_dump($array);

   // Before this RFC:
   // array(3) {
   //   [0]=>
   //   int(1)
   //   [1]=>
   //   int(2)
   //   [2]=>
   //   &int(2)
   // }

   // After this RFC:
   // array(3) {
   //   [0]=>
   //   int(1)
   //   [1]=>
   //   int(2)
   //   [2]=>
   //   int(3)
   // }

The current behavior looks like a bug at first glance, but is entirely
consistent with reference semantics in PHP. The reason for this behavior
becomes apparent if we write out the loops:

.. code:: php

   $array = [1, 2, 3];
   $value =& $array[0];
   $value =& $array[1];
   $value =& $array[2];
   // $value is still a reference to $array[2] here.
   $value = $array[0]; // $array will be [1, 2, 1] here.
   $value = $array[1]; // $array will be [1, 2, 2] here.
   $value = $array[2]; // $array will be [1, 2, 2] here.

While the behavior is justifiable, it remains unexpected.

Proposal
--------

This RFC proposes to change the semantics of foreach by reference to
unwrap the reference after the loop. This means that ``$value`` will
still have the value of the last (visited) element, but will no longer
be a reference to it. This also applies if the loop is left using
``break``, ``continue`` or ``goto``.

While PHP does not have a dedicated language construct for reference
unwrapping, the operation is logically equivalent to:

.. code:: php

   $tmp =& $value;
   unset($value); // Unset has reference breaking semantics.
   $value = $tmp;

For the motivating case, this means that $value is no longer a reference
after the first loop, which means that the second loop will not modify
the array:

.. code:: php

   $array = [1, 2, 3];
   foreach ($array as &$value) { /* ... */ }
   // $value is no longer a reference here.
   foreach ($array as $value) { /* ... */ }
   var_dump($array);

   // array(3) {
   //   [0]=>
   //   int(1)
   //   [1]=>
   //   int(2)
   //   [2]=>
   //   int(3)
   // }

There is one edge case to consider: The foreach value variable may be
any writable variable, not necessarily a simple variable. While very
unusual, all of the following are legal:

.. code:: php

   foreach ($array as &$info['value']) {}
   foreach ($array as &$arrayCopy[]) {}
   foreach ($array as &getInfo()['value']) {}

This RFC proposes to only perform the reference unwrapping for simple
variables of the form ``$value`` ("CV"), but not for complex variables.

The reason is that complex variables may have side effects. The most
obvious case is ``&$arrayCopy[]``, which would result in an additional
null element being appended to ``$arrayCopy`` while attempting the
unwrap. The ``&getInfo()['value']`` case could similarly have arbitrary
side-effects in the ``getInfo()`` call. Even ``&$info['value']`` might
be invoking ``__get()``.

Use of complex variables as foreach targets is very unusual, so it is
rather unlikely that someone will encounter issues with the reused loop
variables in this context. Always performing the unwrap would certainly
be possible, but the cure seems worse than disease in this instance.

When foreach is used in conjunction with destructuring, unwrapping will
be performed on simple destructuring targets:

.. code:: php

   foreach ($array as [&$var, &$complex->var]) {}

In this example, ``$var`` will be unwrapped because it is a simple
variable, while ``$complex->var`` is not affected. As with the
non-destructuring case, use of complex variables in this context is
unusual and may have side-effects.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

This change is backwards-incompatible, in that it's no longer possible
to modify the last (visited) array element through the ``$value``
variable after the foreach loop.

.. code:: php

   foreach ($array as &$value) { /* ... */ }
   // This assignment no longer has an effect on $array:
   $value = 'Modify the last element';

This kind of usage is expected to be very rare, and breaking it is
worthwhile to remove a common gotcha for less experienced PHP
developers. It's possible to restore the previous behavior by explicitly
assigning to a separate variable inside the loop:

.. code:: php

   $lastRef = null;
   foreach ($array as &$value) {
       /* ... */
       $lastRef =& $value;
   }
   // This will continue to work.
   $lastRef = 'Modify the last element';

Vote
----

Yes/No

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/7364
:Original Authors: Nikita Popov nikic@php.net
:Original PHP Version: PHP 8.2
:Original Status: Under Discussion
:Slug: foreach_unwrap_ref
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/foreach_unwrap_ref
