-> In Const Expressions
=======================

:PHP-RFC: 0845
:Title: -> In Const Expressions
:Author: Ilija Tovilo <ilutov@php.net>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2022-05-27
:PHP-Version: 8.2
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

This RFC proposes to allow use of ``->`` in constant expressions. The
primary motivation for this change is to allow fetching the ``name`` and
``value`` properties of enums in places where enum objects aren't
allowed, like array keys (see
https://github.com/php/php-src/issues/8344).

.. code:: php

   enum A: string {
       case B = 'B';
       // This is currently not permitted
       const C = [self::B->value => self::B];
   }

There is currently no way to express this without repeating the value of
the enum case.

This RFC proposes to relax this restriction and allow the use of ``->``
inside of constant expressions.

Proposal
--------

This RFC proposes to allow the use of ``->`` inside all constant
expressions. As ``->`` may only be used on objects there are two
scenarios where ``->`` can be used:

-  Enums (for the ``name`` and ``value`` properties)
-  ``new`` (for any declared property or magic ``__get``)

Here are a few examples of code that will become valid if this RFC is
accepted:

.. code:: php

   // Where E::B is a unit enum
   const A = E::B->name;

   // Where E::C is a backed enum
   function a() {
       static $b = E::C->value;
   }

   // Where B is a class with a property $c
   #[A((new B)->c)]
   class D {}

   // Where C::$d is an object with a property $e
   function a(
       $b = (new C)->d->e
   ) {}

   // The rhs of -> allows other constant expressions
   const A = 'foo';
   const B = (new C)->{A};

The behavior is identical to ``->`` outside of constant expressions,
including access on non-object warnings, undefined property warnings,
etc.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

There are no backwards-incompatible changes in this RFC.

Alternative approaches
----------------------

Alternatively, arrays could be extended to allow enums or all objects as
keys. This is the approach of the `object keys in arrays
RFC <https://wiki.php.net/rfc/object_keys_in_arrays>`__. While this RFC
still might be worthwhile it comes with significant API changes in the
engine and it does break the assumption in userland code that array keys
are of type ``int|string``.

Vote
----

Voting opened on xxx and closes on xxx.

Question: Add support for fetching properties in constant expressions?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/8625
:Original Authors: Ilija Tovilo ilutov@php.net
:Original PHP Version: PHP 8.2
:Slug: fetch_property_in_const_expressions
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/fetch_property_in_const_expressions
