Create A Global Login System For Php.net
========================================

:PHP-RFC: 0846
:Title: Create A Global Login System For Php.net
:Author: Aaron Junker <aaronjunker@php.net>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2022-05-23
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

Currently there are different login systems all over php.net:

-  wiki.php.net uses wiki intern login and login over VCS account
-  pecl.php.net uses an own login system
-  pear.php.net uses an own login system
-  bugs.php.net uses own login system to report security bugs and login
   over VCS account
-  Mailing lists are using own tracking system
-  edit.php.net allows login over several platforms (also GitHub), VCS
   and anonymous login
-  php.net user contribution notes uses no login
-  php.net preferences use cookies to save preferences.
-  GitHub php source code uses GitHub login

Currently there is a login system called VCS accounts which generate a
@php.net mail, but you need to request it and the normal user is not
able to get one, so it does not fit for a global login.

There are two proposed ideas in this direction: `A New Proposal for a
global php.net Login System Using OAuth 2 </ideas/phplogin>`__ and `PHP
Authentication System </ideas/phpnetauth>`__.

Proposal
--------

This RFC proposes different scenarios for creating a global php.net
login experience.

A global login would allow a better moderation of users across all sites
of php.net.

1.1 Global login system
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Add a global system all over php.net that allows you to login with one
account over all pages. This will add a login and register button to the
general PHP design.

main.php.net will be restructured to be used by general users and not
just VCS account users.

1.2 Type of global login system
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are 3 proposed cases of how people would be able to log in

Use only oAuth from GitHub
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Use GitHub to log into php.net. GitHub is used for development of PHP
and so on every developer of PHP has one.

Only use own system
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Advantages: Full control over users and their data.

Disadvantages: Resources needed to create such a system, that we
currently don't have.

Mixed login
^^^^^^^^^^^

Allow both of the two proposed ideas.

1.3 VCS accounts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You will be able to connect your existing VCS account to the new php.net
account and use the same features as before. VCS account request will be
connected to the php.net login.

GitHub accounts connected to VCS accounts will be ported over to the new
account system (unless in 1.2 option 2 is selected).

2.1 my php.net user preferences
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

My php.net user preferences are currently saved in cookies. This would
allow associating these settings with your php.net account.

2.2 www.php.net user contributed notes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Currently you can give more or less anonym contribution notes on docs
pages (entering a mail adress is voluntary). A global login system would
help reducing spam comments and directly adressing users that wiolate
the rules.

3.1 bugs.php.net login
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

bugs.php.net is currently only used for reporting security bugs. A
integration with the php.net login system would be questionable, but
still possible.

If voted "yes" on this one bugs.php.net could allow login only from
people with connected VCS account.

4.1 edit.php.net login
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

edit.php.net allows log in with different platforms as well as anonymous
and VCS login. When voted "yes" this would only allow login with the new
php.net account (and also anonymous login when voted "Yes, but still
allow anonymous login").

5.1 pecl.php.net and pear.php.net login
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

pecl.php.net and pear.php.net are using their own account systems. This
would integrate both of these systems into the new php.net account
system.

6.1 people.php.net
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

people.php.net will keep showing only people with a VCS account attached
to their php.net accounts. Aditionally it will no longer show the karma
from git.php.net and svn.php.net, but in which PHP repositorys on GitHub
this user participated.

7.1 wiki.php.net
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

wiki.php.net runs on Dokuwiki, a software that can be extended by
plugins. The idea here is to create an own plugin that redirects from
and to the PHP account service.

main.php.net will provide a feature to transfer the rights you had with
your old wiki account to your new php.net account.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

.. _global-login-system-1:

1.1 Global login system
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Do you want a global login system on php.net?

If you vote "no" please vote on the other votings like the result would
be "yes", because when this vosting results in "no" all other votings in
this RFC will be not of matter.

Question: 1.1 Global login system
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

.. _type-of-global-login-system-1:

1.2 Type of global login system
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

What type of login system do you want?

Question: 1.2 Type of global login system
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-1:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Use oAuth provider GitHub
-  Use own system (hosted on php.net)
-  Use both

.. _vcs-accounts-1:

1.3 VCS accounts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Nothing to vote on.

2.1 my www.php.net user preferences
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Do you want the new login system to be integrated into my php.net user
preferences?

Question: 2.1 www.php.net use preferences
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-2:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes, only allow setting settings with account
-  Yes, but still allow the old system with saving settings in cookies
-  No

.. _www.php.net-user-contributed-notes-1:

2.2 www.php.net user contributed notes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Do you want the new login system to be integrated into www.php.net
contributed notes?

Question: 2.2 www.php.net user contributed notes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-3:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes, only allow setting notes with account
-  Yes, but still allow the old system
-  No

.. _bugs.php.net-login-1:

3.1 bugs.php.net login
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Do you want the new login system to be integrated into bugs.php.net?

Question: 3.1 bugs.php.net login
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-4:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

.. _edit.php.net-login-1:

4.1 edit.php.net login
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Do you want the new login system to be integrated into edit.php.net?

Question: 4.1 edit.php.net login
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-5:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  Yes, but still allow anonymous login
-  Keep old login system completely

5.1 pecl.php.net login and pear.php.net login
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Do you want the new login system to be integrated into pecl.php.net and
pear.php.net?

Question: 5.1 pecl.php.net login and pear.php.net login
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-6:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

.. _people.php.net-1:

6.1 people.php.net
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Nothing to vote on.

.. _wiki.php.net-1:

7.1 wiki.php.net
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Do you want the new login system to be integrated into wiki.php.net?

Question: 7.1 wiki.php.net
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-7:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes, fully migrate
-  Yes, but still allow old login system
-  No

References
----------

Make a GitHub oauth app: `GitHub
Docs <https://docs.github.com/en/developers/apps/building-oauth-apps>`__

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Aaron Junker, `aaronjunker@php.net </mailto/aaronjunker@php.net>`__
:Original Status: Under Discussion
:Possible Developer: Aaron Junker, `aaronjunker@php.net </mailto/aaronjunker@php.net>`__
:Slug: global_login
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/global_login
