Make The Iterator_*() Family Accept All Iterables
=================================================

:PHP-RFC: 0849
:Title: Make The Iterator_*() Family Accept All Iterables
:Author: Tim Düsterhus <duesterhus@woltlab.com>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2022-06-21
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

PHP's ``iterator_*()`` family currently only accept ``\Traversable``\ s
(i.e. they reject plain ``array``\ s). This is unnecessarily limiting.

Specifically this concerns the ``iterator_to_array()`` and
``iterator_count()`` functions. While each of them has an array-specific
counterpart, the fact that one needs to choose either the array-specific
variant or the everything-but-array variant makes writing code the deals
with arbitrary ``iterable``\ s unnecessarily verbose.

As an example: Allowing ``iterator_to_array()`` to take an array, makes
it much easier to write functions accepting an ``iterable`` and
processing it using ``array_map()`` et al:

.. code:: php

   function before(iterable $foo) {
       if (!is_array($foo)) {
           $foo = iterator_to_array($foo);
       }

       return array_map(strlen(...), $foo);
   }
   function after(iterable $foo) {
       $foo = iterator_to_array($foo);

       return array_map(strlen(...), $foo);
   }

Proposal
--------

The ``$iterator`` parameter of ``iterator_to_array()`` and
``iterator_count()`` should be widened from ``\Traversable`` to
``iterable`` (i.e. to ``\Traversable|array``).

Specifically if this RFC is accepted the following shall hold:

iterator_to_array
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: php

   iterator_to_array($array, true) == $array
   iterator_to_array($array, false) == array_values($array)

iterator_count
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: php

   iterator_count($array) == count($array)

iterator_apply
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This function is **not** part of this proposal, because it is
non-obvious how to define the behavior for ``array``\ s, given that it
does not pass the ``Iterator`` to the callback by default.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

None, this is a purely type widening change.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

next PHP 8.x

RFC Impact
----------

To SAPIs
~~~~~~~~

none

To Existing Extensions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

none

To Opcache
~~~~~~~~~~

none

New Constants
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

none

php.ini Defaults
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

none

Open Issues
-----------

none

Unaffected PHP Functionality
----------------------------

Anything that isn't ``iterator_to_array()`` or ``iterator_count()``.

Future Scope
------------

none

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

Each vote requires a 2/3 majority.

Question: iterator_to_array: Change the type of iterator_to_array()’s $iterator parameter from \\Traversable to iterable?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Question: iterator_count: Change the type of iterator_count()’s $iterator parameter from \\Traversable to iterable?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-1:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Patches and Tests
-----------------

https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/8819

Implementation
--------------

n/a

References
----------

-  Pre-RFC discussion: https://externals.io/message/117979
-  PoC implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/8819
-  Similar previous RFC that proposed adding **new** functions with an
   ``iterable_*`` prefix:
   https://wiki.php.net/rfc/iterable_to_array-and-iterable_count
-  Stack Overflow asking for ``iterable_to_array()``:
   https://stackoverflow.com/q/44587973/782822

Rejected Features
-----------------

none

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Tim Düsterhus, duesterhus@woltlab.com
:Original Status: Under Discussion
:Slug: iterator_xyz_accept_array
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/iterator_xyz_accept_array
