Random Extension Improvement
============================

:PHP-RFC: 0853
:Title: Random Extension Improvement
:Author: Go Kudo <g-kudo@colopl.co.jp>, <zeriyoshi@gmail.com>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2022-06-16
:Version: 1.4

Introduction
------------

There are several issues with RFC: Random Extension 5.x that are already
in the voting phase due to lack of proper discussion.

Key issues include:

Engine implementations are not final
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Random Extension has classes that are natively implemented as RNG
engines, but they are not marked as final. This allows classes to be
created that inherit from native classes, but as stated in the previous
RFC, user-implemented engines are inferior to native classes in terms of
execution efficiency. This is true even for inheritance without method
overrides, which often leads to confusion.

The extension already provides a Random\Engine interface with a single
generate(): string method. Even if the native classes are made final, it
is easy for the user to create an alternative class using delegates.

This is clearly an API design error, and the native implementations of
the interface should be marked as final.

Randomizer lacks array_rand() replacement method
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

array_rand() uses RNG internally, but there is no alternative method in
Randomizer. As per the previous RFC, this was the intent, but upon
further investigation, array_rand() is used by many packages and should
probably be drop-in replaceable.

However, the name of the method may need to be reconsidered. How about
Randomizer::pickArrayKey(array $array, int $num = 1): int|string|array
or something similar?

"string" means a binary
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In PHP, "string" means a binary. This is often a problem when using
multibyte characters. For example, str_shuffle on a Japanese (UTF-8)
string will give messed up results.

Therefore, it may be better to change the alternative method of
str_shuffle(), Randomizer::shuffleString(), to
Randomizer::shuffleBytes(). This is a more appropriate name.

PCG64 is ambiguous
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Random Extension has implemented PCG64 as a new PRNG, but it is
officially one variant of PCG64, oneseq-128-xsl-rr-64, and may need to
be made more easily understood.

Therefore, change the class name from Random\Engine\PCG64 to
Random\Engine\PCGOneseq128XslRr64.

Mersenne Twister is ambiguous
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When PCG makes the choice to reflect a more detailed implementation in
the name, Random\Engine\MersenneTwister is also an issue at the same
time.

Random\Engine\MersenneTwister is precisely an implementation of the
MT19937 algorithm.

MT19937 also has an algorithm called MT19937_64 that generates 64-bit
values. If for some reason MT19937_64 were to be implemented, the fact
that the name Mersenne Twister is already in use could be problematic.

PCG is not so famous
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

PCG is a very good algorithm, boasting great randomness and performance.

However, I think its name recognition is in some ways inferior to
Vigna's RNG, which started with Xorshift.

Therefore, I reimplement Xoshiro256**, which was previously mentioned as
a candidate, and create the class Random\Engine\Xoshiro256StarStar. This
will avoid the problem of using the old MT19937 since it is not familiar
with PCG.

CombinedLCG is outdated
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The newly added Random\Engine\CombinedLCG is only for use with PHP's
lcg_value() function. However, this algorithm is very classical and the
quality of the output random numbers is at the lowest level.

In order to preserve the implementation of the lcg_value() function, the
internal implementation is retained, but the implementation as a class
is being dropped to prevent users from unintentionally using it.

Random\SerializableEngine is outdated
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This interface is a remnant from when the Serializable interface was
still useful. This interface is no longer needed in PHP, as
serializability is now determined by the existence of a magic method.

For this reason, remove RandomEngine\SerializableEngine.

Proposal
--------

For each of these issues, we will create a ballot option and make a
decision.

.. _engine-implementations-are-not-final-1:

Engine implementations are not final
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: Engine implementations to final
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

.. _randomizer-lacks-array_rand-replacement-method-1:

Randomizer lacks array_rand() replacement method
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: Add Random\Randomizer::pickArrayKey(array $array, int $num = 1): int|string|array
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-1:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

.. _string-means-a-binary-1:

"string" means a binary
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: Rename Random\Randomizer::shuffleString() to Random\Randomizer::shuffleBytes()
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-2:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

.. _pcg64-is-ambiguous-1:

PCG64 is ambiguous
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: Rename Random\Engine\PCG64 to Random\Engine\PCGOneseq128XslRr64
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-3:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

.. _mersenne-twister-is-ambiguous-1:

Mersenne Twister is ambiguous
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: Rename Random\Engine\MersenneTwister to Random\Engine\MT19937
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-4:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

.. _pcg-is-not-so-famous-1:

PCG is not so famous
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: Implement Random\Engine\Xoshiro256StarStar
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-5:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

.. _combinedlcg-is-outdated-1:

CombinedLCG is outdated
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: Drop Random\Engine\CombinedLCG
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-6:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

.. _randomserializableengine-is-outdated-1:

Random\SerializableEngine is outdated
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: Remove Random\SerializableEngine
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-7:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

The following names have been reserved and will no longer be available:

-  Random\Engine\PCGOneseq128XslRr64
-  Random\Engine\Xoshiro256StarStar
-  Random\Engine\MT19937

The following class names will be made available again:

-  Random\Engine\CombinedLCG
-  Random\SerializableEngine

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

8.2

RFC Impact
----------

To SAPIs
~~~~~~~~

none

To Existing Extensions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

none

To Opcache
~~~~~~~~~~

none

New Constants
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

none

php.ini Defaults
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

none

Patches and Tests
-----------------

currently none

References
----------

-  https://externals.io/message/117939

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:First Published At: http://wiki.php.net/rfc/rng_extension
:Original Authors: Go Kudo g-kudo@colopl.co.jp zeriyoshi@gmail.com
:Original Status: Under Discussion
:Slug: random_extension_improvement
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/random_extension_improvement
