Add True Type
=============

:PHP-RFC: 0854
:Title: Add True Type
:Author: George Peter Banyard <girgias@php.net>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2022-04-07
:PHP-Version: 8.2
:Version: 0.1

Introduction
------------

PHP now has support for ```null`` and ``false`` as standalone
types </rfc/null-false-standalone-types>`__. However, ``true`` which is
the natural counter part of ``false`` does not even exist as a type.

The motivations are the same to previous RFC targeting the type system:

-  Type system completeness
-  Providing precise type information while satisfying LSP

Proposal
--------

Add support for using ``true`` as a type declaration, wherever type
declarations are currently allowed.

.. code:: php

   class Truthy {
       public true $truthy = true;
       
       public function foo(true $v): true { /* ... */ *}
   } 

Compile time redundancy checks
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As it is the case currently for ``false`` a compile time error will be
emitted if ``true`` and ``bool`` are present in union. For example, the
following function signature:

.. code:: php

   <?php
   function test(): bool|true {}
   ?>

Will emit the following error:     Fatal error: Duplicate type true is redundant in %s on line %d

A compile time error is also emitted when ``true|false`` is used instead
of ``bool``. The following function signature:

.. code:: php

   <?php
   function test(): false|true {}
   ?>

will emit the following error:     Fatal error: Type contains both true and false, bool should be used
    instead in %s on line %d

Examples
~~~~~~~~

There are many examples of functions which only return ``true``. Example
of internal functions are all the ``array_sort`` functions always return
``true``. And examples of userland projects which can benefit of this
change is Composer, which has various cases where they could use a
``true`` type.
`[1 <https://github.com/composer/composer/blob/main/src/Composer/Command/DiagnoseCommand.php#L204>`__]
`[2 <https://github.com/composer/composer/blob/f509c41280768b1d3047271ec5b50da33184d98d/src/Composer/Autoload/ClassLoader.php#L425>`__]
`[3 <https://github.com/composer/composer/blob/main/src/Composer/Json/JsonFile.php#L194>`__]
`[4 <https://github.com/composer/composer/blob/main/src/Composer/Repository/ComposerRepository.php#L1509>`__]

Reflection
~~~~~~~~~~

The new ``true`` type will behave as any other type in regards to
Reflection.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

This RFC does not contain any backwards incompatible changes.

Proposed PHP Version
--------------------

Next minor version, i.e. PHP 8.2.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

As per the voting RFC a yes/no vote with a 2/3 majority is needed for
this proposal to be accepted.

Voting started on 2022-03-12 and will end on 2022-03-26.

Question: Accept Add true type RFC?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Implementation
--------------

GitHub pull request: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/8326

After the project is implemented, this section should contain

-  the version(s) it was merged into
-  a link to the git commit(s)
-  a link to the PHP manual entry for the feature

References
----------

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/8326
:Original Authors: George Peter Banyard, girgias@php.net
:Original Date: 2022-04-7
:Original PHP Version: PHP 8.2
:Original Status: Under discussion
:Slug: true-type
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/true-type
