Add An Optional Parameter $result_code To Shell_exec()
======================================================

:PHP-RFC: 0855
:Title: Add An Optional Parameter $result_code To Shell_exec()
:Author: Luca Petrucci <luca@lucapetrucci.net>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2021-11-21
:Version: 1

Introduction
------------

The shell_exec() function is used to execute an external program and
grab its entire output as a string, but it lacks a way to capture the
exit code of the launched program contrarily to all the other functions
of the same family (exec, system, passthru).

Proposal
--------

This RFC proposes the addition of a second, optional parameter
$result_code to the shell_exec() function: <code php> function
shell_exec(string $command, &$result_code = null): string|false|null {}
</code> If $result_code is present, the function will put the return
code of the program into it. The same parameter and behaviour is found
in exec(), system() and passthru() functions.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

No backward compatibility breaks.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

Next PHP 8.x, currently PHP 8.2.

RFC Impact
----------

To SAPIs
~~~~~~~~

None.

To Existing Extensions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

None.

To Opcache
~~~~~~~~~~

None.

New Constants
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

No new constants introduced.

php.ini Defaults
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

No new php.ini options introduced.

Unaffected PHP Functionality
----------------------------

-  Behaviour of shell_exec() when called with one parameter will not
   change;
-  `Backtick
   operator <https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.operators.execution.php>`__
   functionality is unaffected.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

Yes/No vote, super majority of 2/3 required to pass.

Implementation
--------------

-  `Pull request (Github) <https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/7663>`__

References
----------

-  `Relevant feature request posted by another user
   (Bugsnet) <https://bugs.php.net/bug.php?id=81493>`__
-  Functions that already have the return_code parameter:

   -  `exec() <https://www.php.net/manual/en/function.exec.php>`__
   -  `system() <https://www.php.net/manual/en/function.system.php>`__
   -  `passthru() <https://www.php.net/manual/en/function.passthru.php>`__

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Luca Petrucci, luca@lucapetrucci.net
:Original Status: Under discussion
:Slug: shell_exec_result_code_param
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/shell_exec_result_code_param
