Add True Type
=============

:PHP-RFC: 0862
:Title: Add True Type
:Author: George Peter Banyard <girgias@php.net>
:Status: Accepted
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2022-04-07
:PHP-Version: 8.2
:Version: 0.2

Introduction
------------

PHP now has support for `null and false as standalone
types </rfc/null-false-standalone-types>`__. However, ``true`` which is
the natural counter part of ``false`` does not even exist as a type.

The motivation in the `Union Types 2.0 RFC </rfc/union_types_v2>`__ to
include ``false`` but not ``true`` was:

    While we nowadays encourage the use of null over false as an error
    or absence return value, for historical reasons many internal
    functions continue to use false instead. As shown in the statistics
    section, the vast majority of union return types for internal
    functions include false.

    A classical example is the ``strpos()`` family of functions, which
    returns ``int|false``.

    While it would be possible to model this less accurately as
    ``int|bool``, this gives the false impression that the function can
    also return a true value, which makes this type information
    significantly less useful to humans and static analyzers both.

    For this reason, support for the ``false`` pseudo-type is included
    in this proposal. A ``true`` pseudo-type is not part of the
    proposal, because similar historical reasons for its necessity do
    not exist.

We believe there are now sufficient reasons to include support for the
``true`` type.

With the introduction of ``ValueError`` and many ``E_WARNING`` being
promoted to Errors/Exceptions in PHP 8.0.0, a large amount of internal
functions which used to return ``false`` on failure/error no longer do.
And they now always return ``true``. Ideally these function would be
converted to ``void`` but doing so is a BC break. Moreover a ``void``
function always returns ``null`` which is a falsy value. Therefore the
following code would now never hit the happy path:

.. code:: php

   if (function_which_could_fail_before()) {
       // Do useful stuff
   } else {
      // Bailout and handle error
   }

Marking these internal functions as having a return type of ``true``
could allow tools, such as static analysers, to mark part of this code
unreachable.

Another motivation is providing more precise type information for humans
and static analysers while satisfying LSP. For example a child method
which always returns ``true`` instead of ``bool``:

.. code:: php

   class User {
       function isAdmin(): bool
   }

   class Admin extends User
   {
       function isAdmin(): true
       {
           return true;
       }
   }

Finally, being able to add a ``true`` return type would help the
optimizer and also prevent manually maintaining specialized information
for the optimizer.

Proposal
--------

Add support for using ``true`` as a type declaration, wherever type
declarations are currently allowed. The ``true`` type does not allow
coercions, exactly as how the ``false`` type currently behaves.

.. code:: php

   class Truthy {
       public true $truthy = true;
       
       public function foo(true $v): true { /* ... */ *}
   } 

Compile time redundancy checks
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As it is the case currently for ``false`` a compile time error will be
emitted if ``true`` and ``bool`` are present in union. For example, the
following function signature:

.. code:: php

   <?php
   function test(): bool|true {}
   ?>

Will emit the following error:     Fatal error: Duplicate type true is redundant in %s on line %d

Compile time error for using true|false instead of bool
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A compile time error is also emitted when ``true|false`` (or
equivalently ``false|true``) is used instead of ``bool``. The following
function signature:

.. code:: php

   <?php
   function test(): false|true {}
   ?>

will emit the following error:     Fatal error: Type contains both true and false, bool should be used
    instead in %s on line %d

The rationale is that the subtyping relation between ``false|true`` and
``bool`` needs to be defined. As ``bool`` coerces scalar values but
``false`` and ``true`` currently do not. It is possible to make
``true|false`` follow the same semantics as ``bool``, however this might
impact the implementation of literal types. Therefore the conservative
approach of banning the usage of ``true|false`` is chosen.

Examples
~~~~~~~~

There are many examples of functions which only return ``true`` being
internal or in userland.

Some examples of internal functions which always return ``true`` are the
``array_sort()`` functions, many ``mysqli_*()`` functions,
``SplFixedArray::setSize()``, etc.

An example of a userland project which can benefit of this change is
Composer, which has various cases where they could use a ``true`` type.
`[1 <https://github.com/composer/composer/blob/main/src/Composer/Command/DiagnoseCommand.php#L204>`__]
`[2 <https://github.com/composer/composer/blob/f509c41280768b1d3047271ec5b50da33184d98d/src/Composer/Autoload/ClassLoader.php#L425>`__]
`[3 <https://github.com/composer/composer/blob/main/src/Composer/Json/JsonFile.php#L194>`__]
`[4 <https://github.com/composer/composer/blob/main/src/Composer/Repository/ComposerRepository.php#L1509>`__]

Reflection
~~~~~~~~~~

The new ``true`` type will behave as any other type in regards to
Reflection.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

This RFC does not contain any backwards incompatible changes.

Proposed PHP Version
--------------------

Next minor version, i.e. PHP 8.2.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

As per the voting RFC a yes/no vote with a 2/3 majority is needed for
this proposal to be accepted.

Voting started on 2022-05-29 and will end on 2022-06-12.

Question: Accept Add true type RFC?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Future Scope
------------

The features discussed in the following are **not** part of this
proposal.

Literal Types
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``true`` (and previously ``false``) pseudo-type introduced in this
RFC is a special case of a "literal type", such as supported by
`TypeScript <https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/advanced-types.html#string-literal-types>`__.
They allow specifying enum-like types, which are limited to specific
values.

.. code:: php

   type ArrayFilterFlags = 0|ARRAY_FILTER_USE_KEY|ARRAY_FILTER_USE_BOTH;
   array_filter(array $array, callable $callback, ArrayFilterFlags $flag): array;

A benefit of using a union of literal types instead of an enum, is that
it works directly with values of the underlying type, rather than an
opaque enum value. As such, it is easier to retrofit without breaking
backwards-compatibility.

However, the opinion of the authors is that enums are superior to
literal types and the reason to add ``true`` is due to the extremely low
implementation complexity, as the PHP engine already treats ``true`` and
``false`` as separate types. And that only having ``false`` and not
``true`` is strange.

Allowing usage of true|false
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To allow the usage of ``false|true`` the subtyping relation between
``false|true`` and ``bool`` will need to be defined.

Type Aliases
~~~~~~~~~~~~

As types become increasingly complex, it may be worthwhile to allow
reusing type declarations. There are two general ways in which this
could work. One is a local alias, such as:

.. code:: php

   use int|float as number;

   function foo(number $x) {}

In this case ``number`` is a symbol that is only visible locally and
will be resolved to the original ``int|float`` type during compilation.

The second possibility is an exported typedef:

.. code:: php

   namespace Foo;
   type number = int|float;

   // Usable as \Foo\number from elsewhere

Implementation
--------------

GitHub pull request: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/8326

After the project is implemented, this section should contain

-  the version(s) it was merged into
-  a link to the git commit(s)
-  a link to the PHP manual entry for the feature

References
----------

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/8326
:Original Authors: George Peter Banyard, girgias@php.net
:Original Date: 2022-04-7
:Original PHP Version: PHP 8.2
:Slug: true-type
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/true-type
